A Vedantic Inquiry
Into Supreme Devotion
A Commentary on Eight Verses
from the Bhagavad-Gita
With Examples from the Life & Teachings
of Sri Mata Amritanandamayi DevI
Amritashtakam

BY SWAMI RAMAKRISHNANANDA PURI


Amritashtakam
A Vedantic Inquiry
Into Supreme Devotion
A Commentary on Eight Verses
From the Bhagavad-Gita
With Examples From the Life & Teachings
of Sri Mata Amritanandamayi Devi
By Swami Ramakrishnananda Puri
Mata Amritanandamayi Center
San Ramon, California, USA
Amritashtakam: A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
A Commentary on Eight Verses From the Bhagavad-Gita
With Examples From the Life & Teachings of Sri Mata Amritanandamayi Devi
By Swami Ramakrishnananda Puri
Published By:
Mata Amritanandamayi Center
P.O. Box 613, San Ramon, CA 94583-0613 USA
www.amma.org
www.theammashop.org
Copyright© 2016 by Mata Amritanandamayi Center
All rights reserved.
No portion of this book, except for brief review, may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in any form or by any means–
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise–without
permission in writing from the publisher.
First printing: May 2016
Offered at the Lotus Feet
of my Sadguru, Sri Mata Amritanandamayi Devì
Contents
Sri Mata Amritanandamayi Devì 6
Introduction 7
Sri Adi Sankaracharya 21
Amritashtakam 22
One Who Hates No Being 24
A Friend 35
A Compassionate Person 43
One Without a Sense of “Mine” 53
One Without a Separate Sense of “I” 59
One Who Is the Same in Hardship & Comfort 66
One Endowed With Forgiveness 74
One Who Is Ever Content 85
One Whose Mind Is Concentrated 91
One Who Is Self-controlled 95
One Who Is of Firm Conviction 102
One Whose Mind & Intellect Are Fixed in Me 109
One From Whom the World Cowers Not & Who Cowers
Not From the World 114
One Who Is Devoid of Elation, Non-forbearance,
Fear & Anxiety 126
One Who Is Devoid of Desires 129
One Who Is Pure 137
One Who Is Efficient 141
One Who Is Impartial 144
One Who Is Free From Emotional Pain 149
One Who Has Renounced All Undertakings 152
One Who Neither Rejoices, Hates, Grieves Nor Desires 155
One Who Has Renounced the Auspicious
& The Inauspicious 156
One Who Views Friend & Foe, Honor & Dishonor,
Heat & Cold, and the Comfortable & Uncomfortable
With Equanimity 175
One Who Is Free From Attachment 179
One Who Remains the Same in the Face of
Censure & Praise 180
One Who Is Silent 181
One Who Is Content With Anything 184
One Who Is Homeless 186
One Who Is Firm in Knowledge 190
Concluding Verse 192
Pronunciation Guide 197
6
Sri Mata Amritanandamayi Devì
Through her extraordinary acts of love and self-sacrifice, Sri Mata
Amritanandamayi Devì, or “Amma” [Mother], as she is more
commonly known, has endeared herself to millions around the
world. Tenderly caressing everyone who comes to her, holding
them close to her heart in a loving embrace, Amma shares her
boundless love with all—regardless of their beliefs, their social
status or why they have come to her. In this simple yet powerful
way, Amma is transforming the lives of countless people, helping
their hearts to blossom, one embrace at a time. In the past 40
years, Amma has physically hugged more than 36 million people
from all parts of the world.
Her tireless spirit of dedication to uplifting others has inspired
a vast network of charitable activities, through which people are
discovering the deep sense of peace and inner fulfillment that
comes from selflessly serving others. Amma teaches that the
divine exists in everything, sentient and insentient. Realizing this
truth is the essence of spirituality—the means to end all suffering.
Amma’s teachings are universal. Whenever she is asked about
her religion, she replies that her religion is love. She does not
ask anyone to believe in God or to change their faith, but only to
inquire into their own real nature and to believe in themselves.
7
Introduction
In India, enlightened masters like Amma are referred to by many
different terms. There is siddha—a perfected one; jìvanmukta—one
liberated while alive; mahatma—a great soul... However, perhaps
the most revealing name is atma-jnani a knower of the self. This
name is revealing because it shows us the secret behind what
makes someone like Amma so special—the secret that makes her
so loving, so compassionate, so peaceful, so selfless and blissful.
That secret is that Amma knows who she truly is.
THE IMPORTANCE OF KNOWLEDGE
When we study the Indian scriptures, we see that they stress
the importance of knowledge—its power to completely transform
our lives, its power to completely change the way we perceive the
world, its power to change the way we act. This is because our
understanding of people, places, things, situations, etc, forms
the foundation upon which our entire life is constructed. Just
as every figurine produced from a faulty mold will likewise be
faulty, so too it is with a life founded on faulty understanding. In
the scriptures we find many examples of this phenomenon: the
misunderstanding of the rope to be a snake, the misunderstanding
of the post to be a ghost, the misunderstanding of the mother of
pearl to be silver, etc. What these examples demonstrate is that
when we misunderstand something’s nature, we live our lives
with a misinformed attitude toward that thing, which in turn
leads to misinformed action.
In my youth I saw what is now considered a classic Clint
Eastwood Western, The Good, the Bad & The Ugly (1966),
which provides us with a modern example of this principle.
During the American Civil War, the Union soldiers wore
blue and the Confederate soldiers wore gray. In the film, two
8
Amritashtakam
fugitives of no particular military allegiance are trying to escape
arrest by disguising themselves in stolen Confederate uniforms.
Driving their wagon through the dusty terrain, they see an army
approaching in the distance. They stop their wagon in panic.
Are they wearing gray or blue? Should they keep on their gray
disguises or remove them? As the army comes closer, they see
the soldiers are wearing gray. The fugitives relax and begin
shouting out to their “brothers in arms,” “Hoorah! Hoorah for
the Confederacy! Hoorah! Down with General Grant! Hoorah
for General Lee!” Alas, when the troops stop and start dusting
off their uniforms, they reveal their true colors—they are really
just Bluecoats covered in dust from the trail. By then, it is too
late for the conmen to even try to escape.
When the fugitives were unclear about the nature of the
army, their attitude was one of uncertainty, resulting in the action
of stopping and waiting. When they misunderstood the army
to be friendly, their attitude became one of elation, resulting
in the action of waving and cheering. And when they finally
understood the army to be the enemy, their attitude became one
of fear, which, had there been time, would have caused them
to try to flee.
The principle revealed here is the reason the Upanishads,
Bhagavad-Gita and other scriptures stress the importance of
atma-jnanam—self-knowledge. They tell us that we humans are
born with a misunderstanding of our own nature, and it is this
misunderstanding that is the foundation of all of our problematic
attitudes and actions. In essence, we believe ourselves to be the
finite body-mind-sense complex—a limited individual that is
born, lives a certain number of years of emotional dependency
on unstable objects, and then perishes. The scriptures boldly
proclaim that nothing could be further from the truth—that,
in reality, we are all the infinite, all-pervasive, unindividualized
9
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
consciousness, which was never born, never dies and is of the
nature of perpetual, causeless bliss. India’s spiritual tradition is
confident that if we correct this misunderstanding—that is, if we
can become atma-jnanis like Amma, we can radically transform
our lives for the better, replacing our sorrow, tension and agitation
with bliss, peace and contentment. As the Upanishad boldly
proclaims: tarati éokam àtma-vit—“The one who knows himself
crosses over sorrow.”1
STUDYING THE CHARACTERISTICS
OF THE atma-jnani
In the Bhagavad-Gita, there are several sections wherein Sri
Krishna provides us with descriptions of the virtues, attitudes
and general behavioral characteristics found in the atma-jnani.
These include the description of the sthitaprajña in the second
chapter, the description of the parabhakta in the 12th chapter,
the indications of jñànam in the 13th chapter and of the guåàtìta
in the 14th chapter. 2
 Although Krishna uses different Sanskrit
terminologies, in each section he is describing one and the same
thing: the atma-jnani someone who thoroughly understands his
divine nature. Thus, the qualities enumerated in these sections—
such as compassion, patience, mental control, etc—are, in fact,
products of self-knowledge. Thus, atma-jnanam is the cause; the
virtuous, noble qualities the effect.
For spiritual aspirants like ourselves, who possess at least
a basic understanding of the fact that self-knowledge is the only
means to lasting peace and happiness and who thus desire to
become atma-jnanis, studying these behaviors and attitudes is very
1 Chàndogya Upanishad, 7.1.3
2 Respectively, 2.55-57 and 2.69-2.71, 12.13-19, 13.8-12 and 14.19-25. These
translate as “the person of steady wisdom,” “supreme devotee,” “knowledge,”
and “one who has transcended the guåas.”
10
Amritashtakam
beneficial. First of all, such study helps us gain insight into the
very nature of that which we are striving to attain. For example,
in the second chapter of the Gita, Krishna says an atma-jnani will
be free of attachment, fear and anger.1
 Through our study we
can come to understand exactly why self-knowledge destroys these
negativities. What is the understanding that has arisen in the
atma-jnani about himself that has negated them? What exactly is
the connection between the two? If attaining self-knowledge is the
primary goal of our life, these are questions we must investigate.
We must come to understand the nature of atma-jnanam to the
fullest extent possible.
Another reason it is helpful to study these sections of the
Gita is that, according to the scriptures, all the various virtues
that are natural behavior for the atma-jnani should be taken
as spiritual disciplines by the spiritual aspirant. As Sri Adi
Sankaracharya writes in his commentary on the Gita:
For in all the spiritual scriptures, whatever are the
characteristics of the enlightened person are themselves
presented as the spiritual practices for the spiritual aspirant.2
Furthermore, it is said that unless one has cultivated these
qualities, one can never hope to attain atma-jnanam. Initially,
this sounds confusing. We come to Amma and tell her that
we are fed up with our behavior and want to change; we want
to transcend our likes and dislikes and become a more loving,
compassionate and peaceful person. Amma tells us the only way
to truly do so is to attain self-knowledge. Then we ask Amma how
to attain self-knowledge, and she tells us, “First, overcome your
1 Gita, 2.69: vìta-ràga-bhaya-krodhaã
2 From Sri Sankara’s introductory commentary to Bhagavad-Gita, 2.55: sarvatra
eva hi adhyàtma-éàstre kätàrtha-laksanani yàni tàni eva sàdhànani upadiéyante
yatnasàdhyàtvàt.
11
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
likes and dislikes and become more loving and compassionate
and peaceful.” It sounds like a paradox.
We have to understand this in the proper way. The
qualities enumerated in these sections of the Gita are effects
of self-knowledge. This means that when one has understood
and assimilated his true nature, these virtues will naturally and
spontaneously shine forth to their full capacity. However, atmajnanam is exactly what it says it is: a type of jñànam—knowledge.
True, it is an extremely subtle form of knowledge, but it is
knowledge nonetheless, and all forms of knowledge—no matter
how subtle or how gross, no matter how spiritual or material—
occur only in one place: the intellect. Gross knowledge—say,
the ability to tie one’s shoes or to remember the name of your
brother-in-law—doesn’t require a very refined mind to assimilate.
However, atma-jnanam is said by Krishna to be ràja-vidyà ràjaguhyam—the king of all knowledge and the most subtle.1
 Thus, if
one hopes to fully understand and assimilate self-knowledge, an
extremely subtle and refined mind is required. Therefore, until
one has attained these qualities to a relative extent, one’s mind
will remain inadequate for atma-jnanam. As Sri Sankaracharya
writes:
The undiscriminating ones, who lack self-control, who have
not purified themselves through austerity and control over
their senses and mind, who have not desisted from bad
conduct, who are not tranquil and are proud by nature,
they do not perceive [their true nature], even though they
strive to do so with the help of the valid means of knowledge
such as the scriptures.2
1 Bhagavad-Gita, 9.2
2 From Sri Sankara’s commentary on Bhagavad-Gita, 15.11: yatantaã api
éàstràdi-pramàåamaiã akätatmanaã asaëskätatmanaã tapasà indriya-yajena ca
12
Amritashtakam
So, the difference is one of degree. In order to prepare the mind
for self-knowledge, we first must attain these virtues to a certain
level. Attaining them to their full degree prior to attaining
self-knowledge is impossible. Attaining them to a relative
degree, however, creates a mind capable of understanding and
assimilating atma-jnanam. Then, once atma-jnanam is fully
assimilated, these qualities will manifest to their full capacity,
as we see in Amma. This, in fact, is what Amma is telling us
when she says, “Compassion is both the beginning and the
culmination of spiritual life.”
There are a number of reasons why atma-jnanam is
considered so subtle that special mental preparation is required
for it. First of all, it is the only form of knowledge that is not
about an external object; it is about the subject—about “the
knower” himself. Moreover, it is not about the gross aspects of
the knower—his preferences and intellectual convictions, etc,
which are also objects of perception—but about who he is at his
very core, his very substratum. Thus, to understand and affirm
the information being presented requires a mind capable of
a degree of self-awareness and self-observation unrequired in
other fields of study. If the mind is overly agitated or sluggish or
psychologically conflicted, the information presented—though
remaining valid nonetheless—will be taken more as theoretical
instead of as a living, appreciable truth.
The majority of the qualities presented in the Gita are
appreciated by all cultures, by all religions. Thus, they are
universal values. This is not a coincidence. Values such as
compassion, patience, friendliness, etc, are universal because
they need not really be taught. I know that I want to be treated
by others with compassion, with patience, with friendliness, etc.
duécaritàd anuparatà aéànta-darpatmanaã prayatnaë kurvantaã api na enaë
paéyanti acetasaã avivekinaã |
13
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
Due to this inherent self-understanding, we naturally cognize
that this desire is there in the hearts of all humankind. Thus,
we are born with the Golden Rule etched into our hearts: “Do
unto others as you would have them do unto you.” 1
 Violating
this natural law negatively impacts our psyche, creating mental
discordance, consciously or subconsciously. It fragments the
mind, and a fragmented mind is a broken mind. A broken
mind can never hope to understand and assimilate the highest
spiritual truth, the ultimate reality of our self, of the universe,
and of God. Thus, if we desire to attain atma-jnanam, we must
put in efforts to cultivate these values.
Another reason values are required in order to assimilate
self-knowledge is that, unlike other forms of knowledge, the
full benefit of atma-jnanam is attained only when it has been
integrated to the extent that it has become our natural way of
thinking. To misconceive that we are the finite body-mind-sense
complex is a natural misconception, reinforced by lifetimes
of experiences that seem to support this conclusion. Thus,
assimilating self-knowledge is a long process that requires
dedication—a vigilant inner dialogue that consistently reproaches
and corrects self-ignorant actions, words and thoughts. Thus, we
must willfully remain aware of the spiritual reality as we go about
our life in this material world until that spiritual mode of thinking
has become permanent and natural. As Amma says, “Even if you
were to fall asleep for 10 days, upon waking up you would still
remember who you are—your name, your age, where you live,
etc. This same level of awareness must be there with regard to
our true nature, the self.” Maintaining such self-awareness will
1 As stated in the Mahàbhàrata, Anuéàsana Parva, 114.8: na tat parasya
saëdadhyàt pratikùlaë yad-àtmanaã | eça saëkçepato dharmaã kàmàdanya
pravartate || “One should never do that to another which one would regard as
offensive to one’s own self. This, in brief, is the rule of dharma. Other behavior
is due to selfish desires.”
14
Amritashtakam
not be possible for a dull, agitated or psychologically fractured
mind. Therefore atma-jnanam requires special preparation.
Another reason it is helpful to study these sections of the
Gita is that the presence, or lack thereof, of these qualities can
help us evaluate the degree to which we have assimilated atmajnanam. As mentioned previously, when one has fully assimilated
self-knowledge, these qualities will shine forth spontaneously
and naturally. This is because, as we will see in the upcoming
chapters, each of these qualities corresponds to a given aspect
of self-knowledge. They are attitudes and behaviors founded on
a firm understanding of the spiritual reality of our true nature.
Just as the one who mistakes the rope for a snake will naturally
become fearful and run, so too one who understands the rope
to be a rope will naturally remain calm and continue about his
business. Similarly, one who has understood, for example, “I am
not the body,” will not become emotionally disturbed and react
if someone makes a disparaging remark about his appearance
or if he learns his body is ill. The more we understand and
assimilate self-knowledge—that is, the more we intellectually grasp
and appreciate the reality of our true nature and uproot habitual
thoughts and attitudes based on our previous misunderstanding—
the more these virtues will manifest within us. Thus, investigating
these qualities provides us with a mirror into which we can gaze,
evaluate ourselves, make corrections and progress forward. As
sincere spiritual seekers, we need to remain alert and honest
about our progress.
As Amma regularly reminds us in this regard, ideally we
should maintain a diary in which we monitor our behavior.
Amma gives the example of a street vendor who provides for his
family by buying and selling small items: “Every night, before
going to bed, he will check his profit and loss. If there has
been any loss, he will think up ways to avoid further losses the
15
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
following day. If there has been profit, he will try to think of
ways to increase it. Only after these calculations and decisions
will he go to sleep. Like this, each day, we should introspect and
try to identify our negative reactions. For example, whether we
got angry with someone due to our own selfishness, whether
we were able to help or love someone selflessly, etc. If we did
get angry with someone, we should feel regret and try not to
react in the same manner the next day. If we were unable to
help someone selflessly, we should try to do so the next day.
This kind of introspection, self-reflection and evaluation of our
own actions and reactions will definitely help us move forward.”
Thus, by studying these sections of the Gita, we can use
our negative reactions to identify the exact defect in our self-knowledge and where we need to put in more effort to uproot our
habitual, misinformed attitudes and actions. This should create
a heightened awareness, helping us both correct and ultimately
eradicate our self-misconceptions.
With regards to this self-evaluation, I would like to mention
one more thing. In our evaluation, we should pay attention to
three components: the regularity of our lapses, how long our
lapses last when they do occur, and their severity. If our problem
is patience, how regularly are we losing our patience? Moreover,
when we do lose it, how long is it taking for us to calm back
down? A few minutes? A few hours? A few days? Finally, when
we lose it, to what extent are we doing so? Are we just feeling
mental agitation or are we going one step further and expressing
our frustration verbally—worse yet, physically? One of the many
advantages of having a mahatma like Amma in our lives is that
we constantly have before us a living example of the pinnacle
of atma-jnanam and its manifestation. This is very helpful. At
the same time, while holding the ideal of “Amma-hood” as our
ultimate goal, on a daily basis Amma is not with whom we
16
Amritashtakam
should judge our progress; we should judge our progress only
by comparing ourselves with ourselves. If we constantly evaluate
ourselves using Amma as the measuring stick, we may quickly
become frustrated, decide we are spiritual failures and give up.
However, if we use ourselves as our measuring stick—that is, if
we judge our progress as Amma suggests on a day-to-day, weekto-week, year-to-year basis, analyzing it in terms of regularity,
length and severity—the result will not be one of frustration but
one of inspiration. As Amma says, “Let’s say in the beginning,
our goal is to remain patient in a trying circumstance just once a
day. Even if we are only able to do this, say, five times a month,
it is a great victory. You may not think so, but it is.”
Thus, as we have seen, studying the characteristics of the
atma-jnani presented in these sections of the Gita has many
benefits. Investigating their connection with atma-jnanam helps
us gain insight into the nature of self-knowledge itself—our life’s
goal. It provides an opportunity for us to make ourselves more
aware of the values we need to cultivate in order to prepare the
mind for self-knowledge. Moreover, it assists in evaluating our
spiritual progress—the extent to which we have assimilated the
spiritual teachings we are receiving from the scriptures and
Amma.
THE CHARACTERISTICS OF THE SUPREME DEVOTEE
In this book, we will investigate one of the above-mentioned
sections of the Gita describing the characteristics of the atma-jnani, specifically the one found in the 12th chapter. There,
from verse 13 through 19, Sri Krishna presents us with what is
referred to as the parabhakta laksanani—the characteristics of the
supreme devotee. Together with the chapter’s concluding 20th
verse, this section is sometimes referred to as the Amritashtakam.
17
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
Amäta means both nectar and immortal. 1
 An astakam is a
poem comprising eight verses. These eight verses have come
to be known as the Amritashtakam because of their concluding
verse in which Krishna refers to the qualities enumerated within
them as dharmyàmätam, which means “the dharma that leads
to immortality.”
Before we begin our analysis of the Amritashtakam, it is
important that we understand why Krishna’s conviction is that,
amongst all types of devotees, the atma-jnani stands supreme—a
statement Krishna has emphatically voiced in the Gita’s seventh
chapter:
caturvidhà bhajante màë janàã sukätino’rjuna |
àrto jijñàsurarthàrthì jñànì ca bharatarçabha ||
teçàë jñànì nitya-yukta eka-bhaktirviéiçyate |
priyo hi jñànino’tyartham-ahaë sa ca mama priyaã ||
O Arjuna, best of Bharatas, four types of virtuous people
worship me: the àrta, the jijñàsu, the arthàrthì and the jñànì.
Of these, the jñànì—ever-established and of one-pointed
devotion—is superior. For, I am extremely dear to the jñànì,
and he is extremely dear to me.2
In these two verses, Krishna has divided devotees into four
categories, using four technical names: àrta, arthàrthì, jijñàsu and
jñànì. The àrta devotee is one whose worship of God is aimed
at removing him from some form of material difficulty—perhaps
an illness, a lawsuit or a physical assault. The arthàrthì devotee
1 In the Puràåas, there are many references to a type of sought-after nectar called
amätam that bestows immortality. In fact, amätam is a symbol for the knowledge
of the Vedas. The ritualistic section of the Vedas helps one attain a relative
immortality through heaven, and the Upanishads bring one the understanding
that he is, always has been, and always will be immortal.
2 Bhagavad-Gita, 7.16-17
18
Amritashtakam
is one worshipping God as a means to attain various material
gains—perhaps a promotion, a spouse, a winning lottery ticket,
etc. The jijñàsu devotee is one who has come to understand that
true, lasting happiness can never be achieved through avoiding
material peril or fulfilling material desires, but only through
attaining God. With this conviction, he has become a spiritual
seeker. His worship and spiritual practices are, therefore, only
aimed at bringing him closer to the Divine. Jñànì, of course,
means atma-jnani: a knower of the self who has fully understood
the truth that his true nature and the true nature of God are
one and the same.
Why then does Krishna say that of these four the atma-jnani
is supreme? One can analyze this from a number of different
angles, but the easiest reason to understand is revealed by Krishna’s
description of the jñànì in the same verse: nitya-yuktaã and ekabhaktiã. A nitya-yuktaã is one who is constantly established,
unwavering. An eka-bhaktiã is one who has one-pointed devotion.
Thus, according to Krishna, the devotion of the jñànì is exemplary
because it is the only devotion that is constant and one-pointed.
With the first two types of devotion—the devotions of the àrta
and arthàrthì devotees—this is not the case. First of all, God is not
really the object of their devotion, but merely the means to fulfill
their material desires. Furthermore, their so-called devotion is, at
best, divided three ways: between their love for themselves, their
love for their desired object, and their love for God, the means.
Moreover, even their worship of God as a means continues only
until their desire is fulfilled. Then it stops until another desire
arises. Thus, their devotion can neither be called one-pointed
nor unwavering.
The devotion of the jijñàsu is more mature. Perhaps, at its
peak, it could even be called unwavering, but it cannot be called
one-pointed. Why? Because the spiritual seeker is just what his
19
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
name implies—a seeker. He has yet to fully understand and
assimilate the truth that God and he are not two but one—that
the seeker is, in fact, the sought. As Amma says, devotion is
really just another word for love. It is out of his love for God and
his desire to become one with God that the jijñàsu prays, does
spiritual practices and studies the scriptures. However, because
he has yet to understand that God and he are one—that God is,
in fact, his true nature—his love cannot be called one-pointed. It
remains divided between himself and God. Serving as Amma’s
translator during darsan, I often hear devotees telling Amma
that they love her. When they say this, Amma sometimes takes
the opportunity to shed some wisdom along these lines. She
will say, “No. Not, ‘I love you,’ but ‘I am love.’ Remove the ‘I’
and the ‘you,’ and you will find that there is only ‘love.’ Until
then, love remains imprisoned between the ‘I’ and the ‘you.’”
When Amma says this, she is illustrating the same point: Until
we realize our unity with God, our devotion, or love, will not
be supreme.
Now that we understand the defects in the other three
forms of devotion, it is easy to understand why Krishna says the
atma-jnani’s love is unwavering and one-pointed and, therefore,
superior. In essence, the reason is that the atma-jnani has
understood the truth that he and God are one, and as a result of
that understanding, he has become emotionally full and complete.
He is, as Krishna says in the second chapter, àtmanyevàtmanà
tuçâaã—“content in the self and by the self alone.”1
 His love is
one-pointed on God because he has no desires—nothing to pray
for, nothing to seek. He does not want anything from God.
Knowing he is one with God, he doesn’t even seek God. His
constant self-experience is one of God, and everything he sees
around him he knows to be merely an extension of his own self.
1 Bhagavad-Gita, 2.55
20
Amritashtakam
His understanding that he is one with God is also the
reason why his love for God is unwavering. If we are honest
there is only one person and one person alone for whom we
have eternal, undying, unwavering love, and that is we ourselves.
In fact, all our other so-called “beloveds” are subsidiary to this
one primary love.
Recently, in Amritapuri, Amma was discussing selfless
service with the residents, when she made a thought-provoking
statement. She said, “Whatever I am doing, I am doing for
myself.” Was Amma saying she was selfish? She then explained,
“My belief is that everyone in the world is my child. In fact, I
don’t see them as different from me. So, whatever I am doing,
I am doing for myself.” In essence, Amma was saying that truly
selfless action is only possible when we see others as our own
self. So, yes, Amma was saying that she was selfish—just that her
self-conception was the entire universe.
In fact, the truth expressed here by Amma will be one of
the central themes running through our investigation of the
Amritashtakam. For, as we will see, this understanding not only
makes the atma-jnani the supreme devotee, it also gives rise to
many of the divine qualities enumerated by Sri Krishna throughout
these enlightening verses of the Gita.
That said, with Amma’s grace, let us commence our
investigation into the Amritashtakam.
21
Sri Adi Sankaracharya
The guru-disciple lineages of India are like màlàs strung with
gems; each jewel is precious and invaluable. Still, some shine
with an attention-commanding splendor. Sri Adi Sankaracharya
was such a diamond. His accomplishments were many, but
he is singled out because his brilliant commentaries on the
prasthàna-trayam—the Upanishads, Bhagavad-Gita and Brahma
Sùtras—crystallized the theology known as Advaita Vedànta,
forever establishing it as the ultimate message of the Vedas. Sri
Sankara did not invent Advaita Vedànta. Nor was he the first
to write an Advaitic commentary upon the scriptures. However,
such was the clarity and precision of his scriptural analysis and
so profound its effect upon spiritual thought, that it remains
today—nearly 2,000 years later—the foundational commentary for
all modern Advaita Vedànta discussion. Throughout this book,
we will often look to Sri Saêkara’s insights in order to shed
light upon the Amritashtakam. Therefore, at the outset, I would
like to offer my heartfelt prostrations to Sri Adi Sankaracharya
and to the eternal guru-disciple lineage, before and after him,
through which the Vedantic knowledge has flowed down from
time immemorial.
22
Amritashtakam
adveçâà sarva-bhùtànàm maitraã karuåa eva ca |
nirmamo nirahaêkàraã sama-duãkha-sukhaã kçamì ||
santuçâaã satataë yogì yatatma däáha-niécayaã |
mayyarpita-mano-buddhiryo mad-bhaktaã sa me priyaã ||
yasmànnodvijate loko lokànnodvijate ca yaã |
harçàmarça-bhayodvegairmukto yaã sa ca me priyaã ||
anapekçaã éucirdakça udàsìno gatavyathaã |
sarvàrambha-parityàgì yo mad-bhaktaã sa me priyaã ||
yo na häçyati na dveçâi na éocati na kàêkçati |
éubhàéubha-parityàgì bhaktimàn yaã sa me priyaã ||
samaã éatrau ca mitre ca tathà manàpamànayoã |
éìtoçåa-sukha-duãkheçu samaã saêga-vivarjitaã ||
tulya-nindà-stutirmaunì santuçâo yena kenacit |
aniketaã sthiramatirbhaktimàn-me priyo naraã ||
ye tu dharmyàmätam-idaë yathoktaë paryupàsate |
éraddadhànà mat-paramà bhaktàste’tìva me priyàã ||'
23
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
He who is not hateful to any being, friendly, compassionate, devoid of
“mine” and “I,” who is the same in hardship and comfort, forgiving;
ever content, a yogì, self-controlled, of firm conviction, whose mind
and intellect are fixed on me—such a devotee of mine is dear to me.
He who from the world cowers not and from whom the world doesn’t
cower, who is free of elation, impatience, fear and anxiety—he is dear to me.
The one devoid of desire, who is pure, efficient, impartial, free of affliction,
a renouncer of all actions—such a devotee of mine is dear to me.
That devotee who doesn’t elate, feel aversion, grief or desire, a
renouncer of the auspicious and inauspicious—he is dear to me.
One who is the same toward enemy and friend, honor and dishonor,
cold and heat, comfort and hardship, who is free of attachment;
who is the same in censure and praise, who is silent, content with
anything, homeless, and firm in knowledge—that devotee is dear to me.
However, those who follow this above-said immortal dharma with
faith, with me as the supreme goal—those devotees are [also] very
dear to me.
24
One Who Hates No Being
SARVA-BHÙTÀNÀM ADVEÇÂÀ
The first description of the parabhakta1
 mentioned by Sri Krishna
is sarva-bhùtànàm adveçâà—one who harbors no feeling of hatred
for any being. This is a statement made by Krishna about the atma-jnani. He cannot hate; hatred is impossible for him.
In this regard, I remember an incident that took place
in 2000. That year, a huge match-fixing scandal erupted in
international cricket, making headlines throughout the world.
It began when a phone conversation between the captain for
South Africa and an Indian bookie was intercepted by Delhi
police. In the conversation, the captain spoke explicitly about his
willingness to lose games intentionally in exchange for money. An
official inquiry soon followed. The captain ultimately admitted to
wrongdoing and was given a lifetime ban from cricket. During
the inquiry, he implicated other players, including two who played
for India. Soon, they were also given bans, along with several
others associated with India’s team.
In India, cricket is like a national religion. For example, in
2011, when India went to the World Cup, it was reported that
67.6 million people in India watched the final game. Part of the
reason for this is that the team is not a city team, but a national
team, with the entire nation rooting for it. So, in 2000, when
the two India players were revealed to have intentionally tried to
lose games, the nation was livid. The country’s sentiment was,
“How dare these people, who already made so much money,
1 As mentioned in the Introduction, parabhakta means “one with supreme
devotion.” Although we typically think of a devotee in dualistic terms, it is Krishna’s
view that only one with self-knowledge can truly be called a supreme devotee,
since only the atma-jnani sees God as non-different from his own self, etc.
25
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
betray the nation that loved them—and that they also supposedly
loved back—for a few pieces of silver?”
While they don’t get many opportunities to watch matches,
there are a few Asram residents who remain cricket fans and
continue to follow the team’s standings, etc, in the newspaper.
One of them soon found himself discussing some matters with
Amma, but while he was talking to Amma, his mind kept
returning to the scandal and how the implicated Indian players
had betrayed their team and their nation. Finally, when a break
in the conversation arose, he managed to mention the issue.
He told Amma everything that had happened. Amma listened
intently, seemingly encouraging the young man to share his
heart, including all his various judgments against the now-banned
players.
Typically when we share our feelings with someone, it is
because we want them to agree with us, to share in our feelings.
This is because if it is a joyous experience, we can prolong
our experience of joy through sharing it and, if it is a negative
experience, we can, to some extent, curtail our anger and sorrow
through others accepting our justifications. As the saying goes,
“Shared joy is double joy; shared sorrow is half sorrow.” Amma
listened intently as he explained the scandal, allowing him to
vent his feelings. At the same time she was aware that what he
really wanted was for Amma to express enmity as well. At the
peak of his tirade, he suddenly noticed that instead of the scowl
he was subconsciously hoping to see forming on Amma’s face,
there was just a soft smile. Something about this silenced him.
At which point, Amma said, “Son, you know Amma cannot
hate anyone—don’t you?”
The atma-jnani simply cannot hate; it has been stripped from
his mental programming. In his commentary on the Gita verse
26
Amritashtakam
in which this quality is mentioned, Adi Sankaracharya elaborates
a bit further, writing:
He does not feel hatred for anything, even for that which
is [typically considered] a cause of sorrow, for he sees all
beings as his own self.1
Sri Sankara reveals the depth of this quality in the atma-jnani.
It is not only that he doesn’t feel hatred in a general sense, but
even when someone harms him—verbally or physically—the
emotion does not arise.
I have personally witnessed Amma’s inability to hate
countless times. When I first started coming to Amma in the late
1970s, there was a group of atheistic villagers who were dead set
against Amma. They wanted to expose her as a fake, and when
they continually failed to do so, they took it upon themselves
to try everything they could to harass the devotees, Amma’s
family, Amma’s disciples and even Amma herself. They strew
poisonous thorns on Amma’s pathway, gave Amma poisoned
milk, fabricated lies about her and inflicted upon her many
cruelties. Yet, I never saw Amma become angry with them. I
never heard Amma curse them. I never saw Amma take any form
of revenge. Myself and the other brahmacàrìs would become very
angry. Of course, like the young man who told Amma about the
deplorable deeds of the match-fixers, what we really wanted was
to rile Amma up as well. However, to our chagrin, Amma would
never play along. She would just softly smile and say, “Son, they
are ignorant. We should be patient with them.”
Over the years the majority of the people who were harassing
Amma and the Asram back then have become devotees. (In fact,
one of them even went on to marry Amma’s elder sister.) However,
1 na dveçâà àtmano duãkha-hetum api na kiëcid dveçâi sarvàåi bhùtàni
àtmatvena hi paéyati |
27
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
that doesn’t mean that the Asram no longer faces obstacles and
occasional opposition. In such circumstances—although by now
it shouldn’t—Amma’s inability to feel enmity never ceases to
astound me.
For example, about 10 years ago, someone wrote a negative
article about an Asram project in one of the Malayalam
newspapers. It was full of twisted truths and outright lies.
Everyone knew that the writer was a puppet of an antireligious
organization, but that didn’t make the article sting any less.
The other Asram residents and I were very angry. Regardless of
how much I tried to convince Amma how hate-deserving this
particular journalist was, she wasn’t giving in.
About a year later, the same writer suddenly came for Amma’s
darsan. Someone pointed him out to me, and I quickly made my
way to Amma’s side so that I could point him out to her. When
I did so, Amma said, “Son, I know very well who he is. In fact,
I think he’s probably here to cause more trouble.” As he came
closer and closer to Amma in the darsan line, I wondered what
Amma was going to say to him. (At the same time, I was also
imagining all the things that I would say if he were coming for
my darsan.) Finally it was the reporter’s turn. What did Amma
do? Amma took him into her arms just like everyone else and
gave him a very long, very beautiful darsan, the whole time calling
him her darling, darling son. There’s nothing we can do about
it: Amma cannot hate.
As I watched the man leave the stage with Amma’s prasàdam
clutched in his hand, I shook my head once again in disbelief at
Amma’s compassion. I realized that, as unrighteous as the man’s
deeds had been, Amma understood that calling this person out
and scolding him would not have uplifted him. It would only
have served to further close his heart. Amma knew that only by
28
Amritashtakam
returning the journalist’s cruelty with love could she truly hope
to affect a change within him.
As mentioned in the Introduction, the full blossoming of
qualities such as non-hatred is only found in the atma-jnani
because their full manifestation can only come as a result of
self-knowledge. We have to try to inculcate non-hatred as an
ideal in order to prepare our mind for self-knowledge, but its full
expression only comes as a fruit of that knowledge.
There are a number of reasons why non-hatred is produced
by atma-jnanam. We will look at two. The first reason is presented
by Sri Sankara himself as quoted previously. Sri Sankara writes
that the atma-jnani cannot hate any being because he sees all
beings as his own self.
The scriptures and spiritual masters inform us repeatedly
that we are not the body, not the emotions, not the intellect, but
the witness consciousness that serves as the substratum to these
and all other varieties of phenomena. Furthermore, we are told
that this consciousness is not only our true nature but also the
nature of all beings. Consciousness, we are told, is like space. The
space outside a given room and the space within it are not two;
they are one and the same. Similarly, the consciousness serving as
the substratum of my thoughts and emotions, etc, is not different
than the consciousness serving as the substratum of your thoughts
and emotions, etc. By extension of this understanding, we should
come to the reality that—quite literally—“I am you and you are
me.” It is the assimilation of this supreme truth that results in
the atma-jnani’s inability to experience hatred. This is because
it is a common experience that one cannot hate one’s self.
As Amma says, “A spiritual aspirant should see only God,
which is the essence in everything. Only then will he achieve
equanimity. The electricity that comes through a fan, bulb or
refrigerator is one and the same. The only difference is in the
29
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
medium. Likewise, it is the same consciousness that dwells in
all living beings. We will not feel hatred or anger toward anyone
when we think that the consciousness that dwells in him is the
same as in me.”
Nowhere has this connection been expressed more directly
than in the Upanishads:
yastu sarvàåi bhùtànyàtmanyevànupaéyati |
sarva-bhùteçu càtàmànaë tato na vijugupsate ||
He who sees all beings in the self itself, and the self in all
beings, feels no hatred by virtue of that.1
Some may disagree with the statement that we cannot hate
ourselves. In fact, it is a common expression, “I hate myself so
much right now.” Some people even commit suicide—perpetrating
the ultimate form of violence upon their own being. So, how
can Vedànta make such a claim?
When someone says, “I hate myself,” if we analyze, we will
see that he doesn’t really mean what he is saying. He may mean
he hates his physical body. He may mean he hates the actions he
has performed, his habits or the direction his life is taking. He
could even mean he hates his thoughts and feelings. However,
as the scriptures and spiritual gurus like Amma repeatedly tell
us, these things are not who we are. In fact, this points to the
very difference between the self-enlightened individual and the
self-ignorant. The self-ignorant mistakes himself to be things he is
not: the body, emotions and intellect. Thus he believes he hates
himself. True introspection will reveal that the very statement “I
hate myself,” is, in fact, not an expression of self-hatred but an
expression of self-love. For the very reason a person comes to hate
his body, emotions and intellect is that he wants to experience
1 Ìéàvàsya Upanishad, 6
30
Amritashtakam
peace and happiness, which are his true nature. He wants to
reside in his true nature. This experience is being obscured to
him due to his turbulent mind. Thus, self-hatred and even the
desire to end one’s life have at their root the desire to know and
experience the bliss and peace of one’s true self. If the hated
factor could be changed, the individual’s so-called “self-hatred”
would end. Of course, suicide is not a solution to this problem
because at the problem’s root are mental phenomena, which
the scriptures say can never be eradicated by death. 1
 The only
solution is gradual refinement of one’s thoughts and the ultimate
transcendence of mental identification—in short, spirituality.
In order to understand the second reason why self-knowledge
results in non-hatred, we first have to understand an important
Vedantic principle. If we honestly introspect, we will see that we
are only capable of loving two things: the experience of happiness
itself and the people, places and things, etc, that serve as a means
to our experience of happiness. When we study the scriptures,
we find that, in fact, there is only one source for our experience
of happiness, and that is the atma—our true self. The atma is
often explained as sat cit ànanda—being of the nature of pure
existence, pure consciousness and pure bliss. Thus, happiness
is our true nature; it is the core of who we are. No wonder we
love happiness so much: our love of happiness is the same as our
love of our own self. The scriptures are adamant on this point:
the self is the only source of happiness in this universe. So, why
then does it seem like we are experiencing happiness from, for
example, ice cream? The scriptures explain to us that, in fact, our
1 According to the Vedas, only the physical body dies upon death. The subtle
body—the locus of the mind and its emotional problems and negativities—survives
and is eventually reborn in another physical frame. Thus, Amma says that if
one commits suicide, not only will they have to face the same difficulties again
in a future birth but those very difficulties will be intensified as an effect of
the violence they have committed against themselves.
31
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
desire for such objects is creating turbulence in the mind, which
in turn is obscuring our experience of our true nature. When
our desires are fulfilled, this turbulence momentarily dissipates to
some small degree, and to the same degree the bliss of the self is
then momentarily reflected in the mind for our experience. Thus,
the experience of happiness is not coming from the experience
of the external object but from the self. The object is merely a
means for temporarily removing the desire-created turbulence
obscuring our experience of the self as reflected in our mind.
Through this principle, we can now understand another
reason why the atma-jnani is incapable of hatred. For just as we
are only capable of loving two things—the experience of happiness
itself, and people, places and things, etc, that we believe serve as
a means to the experience of happiness—similarly, we are only
capable of hating two things: the non-experience of happiness,
and people, places and things, etc, that we believe obstruct our
experience of happiness. However, the atma-jnani has understood
happiness to have only one source—himself. This is not only
his understanding; he has assimilated this truth to the point
where he no longer has desire-created turbulence disturbing his
mind and obstructing his experience of the reflection of the self.
Thus, his experience of happiness is no longer dependent upon
“middlemen” such as ice cream. Therefore, neither can anyone
remove the atma-jnani’s experience of happiness, nor can anyone
give the atma-jnani the experience of happiness. If we are only
capable of hating the non-experience of happiness, and people,
places and things, etc, that prevent our experience of happiness,
what scope is there for hatred in the atma-jnani?
In the sixth chapter of the Gita, there is an oft-cited verse,
wherein Sri Krishna points out the Vedantic truth that one has
only one enemy—one’s own mind when it is undisciplined and
lacking in spiritual understanding:
32
Amritashtakam
uddhared-àtmanatmanaë natmanam-avasàdayet |
àtmaiva hyàtmano bandhuràtmaiva ripùràtmanaã ||
One should uplift oneself by oneself; one should not lower
oneself. For oneself alone is one’s friend and oneself alone
is one’s enemy.1
In his commentary, Sri Sankara expresses a possible doubt
regarding this statement. In resolving that doubt he sheds
light on why an atma-jnani cannot hate any being. The doubt
is: How can Krishna say, “Oneself alone is one’s enemy. While
a mind in which negativities are manifesting can be counted
as one internal enemy, it does not preclude the existence of
additional external enemies.” Sri Sankara answers, saying,
“Whoever may be an external enemy is also of his own making
alone. Therefore the emphatic ‘alone’ is logical.” 2
 A brilliant
post-Sankara commentator 3
 elucidates Sri Sankara’s logic. He
says that if one has truly understood spirituality (as the atma-jnani, by his very name, has), then he knows that he is not
the body-mind but the atma—pure consciousness. The very
scope for considering someone as an enemy arises only from
identification with the body-mind complex and the feelings of “I”
and “mine,” the byproducts of that identification. An atma-jnani
has transcended this false identification and thus has only one
potential enemy—the self-misconception itself. Without the rising
of that misconception, there is no scope for an external enemy.
As mentioned in the Introduction, if we want to cultivate
total non-hatred, we must understand these connections. Our
understanding of who we are must be redirected from our current
1 Gita, 6.5
2 yaã anyaã apakàrì bàhyaã éatruã saã api àtma-prayukta eva iti yuktam eva
avadhàraåam
3 Sri Bellaêkoåáa Ràmaràya Kavì (1875–1914), Gità-Bhàçyàrka-Prakàéika
33
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
distorted misconception to our true self. This understanding
cannot be superficial. It has to saturate our subconscious mind;
it has to come to serve not as a mere piece of information
but to reform our entire self-conception and worldview. This
process of atma-jnanam converting from mere information to a
hardwired transformation in self-conception takes time. In the
beginning, we may understand intellectually that, for example, the
consciousness at the heart of who we are and the consciousness
at the heart of all beings is one and the same, yet hatred and
other thoughts contrary to this understanding will still arise.
The Vedantic term for this phenomenon is viparìta bhàvanà,
which literally means “contrary attitude.” In essence, it means
the arising of thoughts from the subconscious that are contrary
to one’s conscious understanding. It is a thought arising from
habit, instead of from knowledge.
When speaking of viparìta bhàvanà, Amma always gives the
example of a wristwatch. She says, “Suppose we have a wristwatch
that we wear all the time. It is always on the wrist, but one day
we sell it. For a few days afterward, we will continue to look at
our wrist to see the time. This is the nature of habit. If this is
the case with ordinary and seemingly insignificant habits, what
to say of the stronger ones? When we try to change them, our
mind will spontaneously turn again and again toward our habits.
Only through constant practice can one get rid of them.”
There is no stronger habit than our identification with the
body, emotions and intellect. To remove it takes constant effort
and practice. It is not easy. I remember when I was a brahmacàrì,
Amma would tell me never to express anger, but only to say
namaééivaya 1
 and walk away. However, my anger was so intense
that—if at all I managed to succeed in this—the anger would still
1 “Prostrations to Éiva,” which has diverse meanings including pure
consciousness, auspiciousness and God.
34
Amritashtakam
manifest in my intonation. When such negative feelings arise, as
sincere seekers, we must check ourselves and remind ourselves of
the supreme truth of our essential oneness with all beings. For the
very arising of hatred is proof that we have forgotten this truth.
This must be done each and every time such feelings arise. In
this way, we can gradually rewire our subconscious mind until
it conforms to our new understanding of who we are. Not only
should we do this in our daily lives, we should also make this
practice part of our morning and evening meditations. There,
with our calmed mind, we should remember the situations that
are prompting our negative reactions. Then we should uproot
the sources of those reactions by remembering the spiritual
truths that negate them, affirming and appreciating the reality
of those truths.
35
A Friend
MAITRAÃ
The next description of the parabhakta given by Sri Krishna
is maitraã—a friend. It is no coincidence that this quality
immediately follows non-hatred in Krishna’s list. If Krishna were to
mention only non-hatred, we might get the wrong impression:
that the atma-jnani is an aloof figure, not hating anyone but also
not expressing any positive affection either. This is a prevalent
misconception about spirituality—that it transforms the seeker
into a recluse who doesn’t hate anyone but who doesn’t really
care about anyone either. By saying he is a friend, Krishna wants
to end this misconception.
In today’s world, the word “friend” is used quite casually.
However, we all know that there are different levels of friendship.
The friendship of the atma-jnani is not superficial. It is a
friendship that is always there for us—not only in our joy but
also in our sorrow. It is a friendship that never expects anything
in return and that would gladly sacrifice everything for our
happiness. A popular American children’s book, The Giving Tree
by Shel Silverstein, provides an excellent example.1
 The tree in
the book cheerfully gives everything, without any regrets, to her
friend, the boy. She verily lives for the boy. She allows him to
play and swing from her branches when he is a child. She allows
him to sell her apples when he wants money as a teenager. She
allows him to cut down her branches and use them to build a
house when he is a man. She even allows him to chop her down
entirely and make a boat out of her trunk upon his retirement.
Finally, when the man is old and infirm and can barely even
walk anymore, the Giving Tree allows him to simply sit on her
1 Shel Silverstein, The Giving Tree, Harper & Row, 1964.
36
Amritashtakam
stump. The Giving Tree never asked for anything in return. Such
is the level of friendship found in the atma-jnani.
It is important to note that Krishna says that the atma-jnani is
not only a friend to a few select individuals, but that his feeling
of friendship extends to sarva-bhùtànàm—to all beings.1
 What
better example of such a person do we have than Amma? No
matter where she goes, no matter who she meets, no matter how
old or how young, how traditional or how modern, how serious,
or how silly, how rich or poor, educated or otherwise, no matter
what language they speak, Amma feels totally comfortable and
at home with them and treats them with warmth, kindness, love
and affection. This is one of the many ways in which Amma
truly is an amma—a mother. It is Amma’s friendliness that draws
many of us close to her, helping us to establish that all-important
bond that ultimately helps us to transcend all bondage.
When Amma is giving programs throughout India, she will
occasionally stop at the houses of devotees. Once Amma was at
one such house, spending time talking with the family. Suddenly,
the youngest child—who was about 17 at the time—began telling
Amma about the devotion of her older sister. She told Amma
how she would often see her sister shedding tears while listening
to Amma singing. Amma is a brilliant psychologist. If there is
a subtext, a hidden meaning behind a statement, Amma will
see it. As such, when this girl told Amma about her sister’s
devotion, Amma knew the real statement was not “My sister
cries whenever she hears bhajans,” but rather “I never cry when
I listen to bhajans. What’s wrong with me? Why don’t I have
any spiritual longing? Don’t I even have one spiritual bone in
my body?” Thus, Amma the psychologist responded, not to the
gross statement, but to the hidden one. Amma told the girl, “But
you and I are friends, aren’t we? We share a friendship. There is
1 Sarva-bhùtànàm not only modifies non-hatred but also friendship.
37
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
only love between us. Devotion means to evoke the love within
you. Amma doesn’t see devotion and love as different from each
other.” With wonder in her eyes, the girl smiled at Amma and
said, “You’re right.”
The love and kinship Amma feels with all beings reflects in
our hearts, and it helps us to open up to Amma as well.
When Krishna says “a friend to all beings,” he doesn’t just
mean all types of people. The heart of the atma-jnani extends
with the feeling of friendship to every aspect of creation. Amma’s
biography is filled with stories illustrating the reciprocal heartfelt
bond between Amma and various animals, and I have personally
seen Amma give darsan not just to common pets like cats and
dogs, but also to parrots, eagles, horses, wolves, cows, goats,
camels, beetles, owls, rabbits, chipmunks, bats, turtles, pythons,
boa constrictors, monkeys, cheetahs, and elephants. Amma’s heart
truly has a space for every aspect of creation. It never ceases to
amaze me how she never forgets to consider the needs and feelings
of even those creatures we typically think of as insignificant.
I remember, one day an Asram resident offered Amma a
flower garland, placing it around her neck as he came for darsan.
The flowers seemed particularly beautiful to me, and I said as
much to Amma. Amma smiled and said, “Yes, but don’t you
think it is sad that someone plucked them before their time? And
what of the poor bees who were hoping to sip nectar from them
today? Amma is happy with any offering her children make, but
I am not only a mother to them. Aren’t the flowers and bees
also my children?” I was really taken aback by the expansiveness
of Amma’s vision.1
1 As with many statements made by Amma, we have to understand the context
in which this comment was made. This person was an Asram resident, and thus
Amma was holding him to a higher standard. On other occasions Amma has
specifically said that she has no issue with people offering flowers in temples, etc.
38
Amritashtakam
Exactly why is it that the heart of the atma-jnani flows out
to all of creation with a feeling of friendship? Here, too, there are
a number of different reasons depending upon the angle taken.
Spiritually ignorant individuals are totally identified with their
likes and dislikes. When we identify with our likes and dislikes,
they restrict with whom we are capable of feeling a heartfelt bond.
Thus, our friendships are limited to like-minded people. Due to
his self-understanding, the atma-jnani no longer identifies with
such mental phenomena. For him, likes and dislikes are no
different than clouds passing across the changeless all-pervasive
sky of consciousness. Thus, he identifies with the consciousness
that serves as their substratum, and this frees him to take up
the likes and dislikes of the people who come before him. We
see this in our interactions with Amma. When we come before
her, she becomes like a mirror reflecting our heart. This is how
Amma can switch from total sorrow to total happiness in the
blink of an eye. A devotee comes to Amma crying and tells of a
family tragedy, and Amma identifies with him and cries along
with him. A minute later, the next devotee excitedly announces
to Amma that she graduated with honors, and we immediately
see her joy radiating across Amma’s face. Amma identifies with
our likes and dislikes and the emotions they produce because
she knows it provides us with the strength, sense of friendship
and support that we need to move forward in life. She knows
it strengthens the bond we feel with her and that through that
bond she can guide us toward attainment of the higher goals of
life. All this is only possible due to Amma’s atma-jnanam and
how it allows her to transcend likes and dislikes.
Amma was born and brought up in a small Kerala fishing
village. She was raised by parents with very traditional Indian
values. Of course, these include universal values such as the ones
mentioned by Krishna in the Gita, but they also include values
39
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
specific to traditional Indian villages. Not all devotees were raised
with the culture-specific values with which Amma was brought
up. Regardless, we never see Amma trying to convince people
from other cultures to try to follow those culture-specific values.
Amma accepts those culture-specific values or discards them
depending upon the person whom she is advising. As Amma
says, “Some things, like the sweetness of sugar or the value of
gold, are the same wherever one goes, but other things, such as
whether one drives on the left or right side of the road, change
from place to place. In this regard every place has its own unique
culture.” It is difficult for someone completely identified with their
culture-specific values to become close friends with those who
do not share those values. However, for Amma, this has never
been a problem. When she is in Germany, she adjusts to the
German culture. When in Japan, to theirs. So, too, in America,
Australia, Kenya... Amma’s self-knowledge has freed her to accept
and reject the superficial according to the given situation, and
this allows Amma to make a heartfelt connection with anyone
and everyone no matter what their likes and dislikes may be.
Let me give you an example. A few years ago a teenaged
Indian boy born and raised in America came for Amma’s
darsan. As per the culture of many teenagers in America, he had
recently got his ears pierced and had a small silver hoop in each
ear. The boy’s mother was clearly unhappy. Being from another
generation, and raised in a traditional Indian environment,
she didn’t want her teenaged son wearing earrings. In truth,
according to the culturally specific values with which Amma was
raised, earrings are not something generally worn by men either.
However, knowing these values were not pertinent to the boy,
who was raised in America, Amma rejected them and took up
the values of the boy. When Amma saw the earrings, she said,
“Oh, they look so nice! But wouldn’t it look better if you got
40
Amritashtakam
some slightly bigger ones?” In fact, this was what the boy really
wanted all along. While Amma will never accept a culturally
specific value that goes against the universal values, she adjusts
to values such as these as per the cultural norm of the person
who comes before her.
This is one reason why atma-jnanam results in one becoming
a friend with all beings: it ceases our identification with our likes
and dislikes and liberates us to take up the likes and dislikes of
the people with whom we interact.
In fact, friendship is the natural mood of humanity. It is an
outward expression of the bliss that is our true nature. Thus, for
the atma-jnani, this attitude flows forth, as natural as breathing.
The expression is blocked only by the fear that arises when
we perceive something as having the potential to obstruct our
experience of inner bliss. This is never an issue for the atma-jnani because he has realized that there is only one source of
bliss—his own self. Thus, no one can possibly obstruct it. Can
anyone obstruct you from experiencing your self? There is no
fear in him that, “Oh, this fellow walking in my direction can
take away my happiness.” Thus, the sense of aversion, which is
the very thing that obstructs the experience of happiness, never
arises in his mind. Let the most annoying person in the world
come pester him, his happiness continues to shine.
This phenomenon is quite fascinating. In our spiritual
ignorance, we project the capability to destroy our happiness upon
someone who actually holds no such power to do so. However,
through this projection, we actually bestow upon him that power.
It is similar to the phenomenon of a bank run, wherein people
become afraid that, if everyone tries to withdraw their money from
the bank at the same time, the bank will fold and they will lose
their money, which in turn causes everyone to try to withdraw
their money and results in the bank folding. Or we can compare
41
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
it to the phenomenon of stage fright, wherein, say, a violinist,
realizes that if he gets nervous and his hands start shaking he
will not be able to perform. This very thought, in turn, makes
him so nervous that his hands shake and he cannot perform. In
reality, no one has the power to stop our experience of the bliss
of the self. We project that power upon their presence. Then, the
sight of them approaching results in mental disturbance in the
form of aversion, which does obstruct our experience of bliss.
Thus, it truly is as the saying goes, “The only thing we have to
fear is fear itself.”
Those of us who have yet to attain self-knowledge are
constantly subconsciously evaluating people as either potential
causes of happiness or potential causes of suffering. The people we
see as vectors of happiness, we are attracted to and we consider our
friends. The people we see as vectors of sorrow, we feel aversion
toward and consider as enemies. The atma-jnani does not live in
such a world. He is not imprisoned by likes and dislikes like the
rest of us. He has understood that happiness only comes from
within, and thus he has severed the ignorance-based connection
that most people believe exists between certain individuals and
happiness and certain individuals and sorrow. Thus, friendliness,
the natural expression of the bliss of the self, never ceases to
flow forth from him to all of creation.
Becoming a friend to all beings to the extent that Amma
has is not easy. In some ways, the first quality mentioned by
Krishna, non-hatred toward all beings, is level-one spirituality,
and feeling friendship toward all beings is level two. An Asram
resident once told me a story that reveals Amma’s appreciation
of this fact. He had just moved to Amritapuri and, as such, felt
very inspired. When you witness firsthand the extent to which
Amma is sacrificing herself, day-in and day-out, to help others,
you cannot help but be inspired to try—in whatever small way
42
Amritashtakam
possible—to move toward a life of selflessness like Amma’s. This
is how this individual felt. Thus, one day, he approached Amma
and, with his heart open wide, told her that he also wanted to
love everyone selflessly like she did. Amma looked at him with
eyes full of compassion, gave him a loving peck on the cheek and
sweetly said, “Son, to begin with, just try not to hate anyone.”
Therefore, we should understand that feeling loving
friendship toward everyone is not easy. Ultimately, it must be
reinforced at a core level by regularly reminding ourselves of
the Vedantic truth of our essential unity. As mentioned in the
previous chapter, this should be done both when our attitudes
run contrary to this understanding, as well as in our daily focused
meditations.
43
A Compassionate Person
KARUÅAÃ
The next quality of the parabhakta mentioned by Sri Krishna
is karuåaã—compassion. Not long ago, I read an article by a
Christian theologian that gave a beautiful definition for mercy,
which I think works fine for compassion: “The willingness
to enter the chaos of another.” 1
 Like Amma, this definition
transforms compassion from a mere emotion into an action.
Amma often says that love is the inner feeling and compassion
its outward expression—i.e. love in action. Like Amma, it also
implies that compassion most often involves sacrifice. “Entering
chaos” is not a casual experience. When people are suffering
physically and emotionally, their lives are often messy. Family
problems, financial problems, social problems, problems of
mental and physical health—they all can create a very disturbing
environment. The burden and pain they create in those suffering
from them can result in tension, depression, frustration and
anger. Just because we are trying to help the afflicted person
doesn’t mean that we won’t become the target of these negative
emotions. Thus, compassion is being there for someone and
helping them despite all of that, sacrificing your time, energy
and resources.
What is Amma’s darsan but her entering the chaos of
thousands upon thousands of lives? Each person coming in the
queue to Amma is bringing with them their pain, their problems,
their fears. Amma tangibly enters their lives, holding them in
that heartfelt embrace, listening to their lamentations, drying
their tears, often shedding tears herself. It is in Amma’s life that
1 James F. Keenan, S.J., Moral Wisdom: Lessons and Texts from the Catholic
Tradition, Sheed & Ward, 2010.
44
Amritashtakam
we see compassion expressed in its totality. Amma constantly
sacrifices food, sleep, solitude, rest—all the things we believe
make life comfortable—simply to bring as many smiles to as
many people as possible, to wipe as many tears as possible, to
be there to unburden the sorrows of as many people as possible.
Why does Amma make this seeming sacrifice? Because Amma
knows that in her arms people feel safe, feel comforted, feel that
finally they’ve found someone who knows them through and
through. With that feeling, they get the strength to move forward
in life, and this, Amma feels, is infinitely more important than
her physical comfort.
I would like to share an incident that illustrates the extent
to which Amma, in her compassion, is willing to sacrifice for the
world—how she is willing to give and give and give, even to her
own physical detriment. This took place in 2006 when Amma
was in Kannur, northern Kerala. It was an extremely large crowd.
Amma had come for the program at 7:00 p.m. the evening before
and, at 9:00 a.m. the next morning, was still giving darsan. At
some point, early in the night, one of the devotees had asked
Amma if, before she drove on to Bangalore, she would stop at
his house. Amma had agreed. As the darsan was going so late,
I couldn’t believe his audacity. Amma had been sitting on the
stage for 14 hours continuously without any food or rest. The
next day would bring another large darsan in Bangalore, and,
yet, this man was pushing Amma to come to his house. Amma
assured him that she would come.
When the darsan finally finished, we learned that the man’s
house was completely out of the way. At this point, I was upset. I
told myself that when we reached his house, I was going to explain
to him that what he had requested of Amma was incorrect. After
a half an hour or so, we arrived. Amma gracefully alighted from
her camper and, looking as fresh as ever, entered the man’s house.
45
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
She did a simple pùjà in the pùjà room, and then the man asked
Amma to go to yet another room. I couldn’t believe it: it seemed
it wasn’t enough that Amma had come to his house; this man
wanted Amma to enter and bless each and every room. Again,
Amma gracefully agreed.
When we entered the room, I suddenly realized why Amma
had agreed to come. There, on the bed, was his child who suffered
from hydrocephalus. His legs and arms were like toothpicks,
and his head was more than double the size of a normal head.
It was so large that he could not even lift it without assistance,
and even then, it was obviously very painful for him. There was
no way he could have come to the program. Amma held the
child, cradling his massive head in her arms and fed him with
her own hands, whispering in his ear, “My son... my son... my
son...” I felt so ashamed for my judgment of this devotee and
admonished myself for second-guessing Amma and her deeper
understanding of what is and isn’t required.
The fact was that, physically, Amma had to have been
exhausted. The darsan had gone on for 14 hours, and the next
day’s darsan would probably be just as long. There is no way that
such physical strain doesn’t have an effect on Amma’s health,
and there is no way that Amma is not aware of that. However,
due to the enormity of Amma’s compassion, there was only one
fact that was relevant to Amma: “One of my children is alone
and in pain, and I have the power to bring him at least a small
amount of comfort.”
How is Amma able to be like this? How is she able to give
and give and give, even when that giving seems to be detrimental
to her best interests? Why, as Krishna says, is compassion a natural
expression for an atma-jnani? Here, we must remember that
a core teaching of Advaita Vedànta is that there is only one
atma. The proponents of Advaita draw upon many scriptural
46
Amritashtakam
statements attesting to this truth. One such statement comes in
Svetàévatara Upanishad:
eko devaã sarvabhùteçu guáhaã sarvavyàpì sarvabhùtàntaratma |
The one God, hidden in all beings, all-pervasive, the inner
atma of all beings.1
Krishna also says this in his own unique way, referring to all the
various bodies as “fields” and the one atma as “the knower of
all the fields”:
kçetrajñaë càpi màm viddhi sarva-kçetreçu bhàrata |
O Bhàrata, also know me as the knower of the fields in
all fields.2
Amma also has her own unique ways of expressing this truth as
well: “All of us are different forms of the one atma, like chocolate
[Hershey’s Kisses] in different colored wrappers. The chocolate
wrapped in a green wrapper may tell the chocolate wrapped in a
red wrapper, ‘I’m different from you,’ and the chocolate wrapped
in red paper may tell the chocolate in blue paper, ‘You and I are
different,’ but once the wrappers are removed, all the chocolates
are exactly the same. In the same way, at the heart of every one
of us is the one and the same atma.”
What these scriptural statements and Amma are telling us
is that if we strip away the superficial layers of our being—the
physical layer, the emotional layer, the intellectual layer, etc—what
remains is the pure awareness, pure consciousness, the true “I.”
1 Évetàévatara Upanishad, 6.11
2 Gita, 13.2
47
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
While the superficial layers are different, the true “I” is one and
the same for every being.
If we are all one inside, why is that not our experience? Why
do we feel separate? This is a common doubt. To understand
this, it is helpful if we look at an example Amma frequently uses.
She says, “Suppose you take 100 pots of water and put them
out under the sun. In each pot, you will see a sun—won’t you?
But that doesn’t mean there are 100 different suns. The sun is
one; the reflections are many.” Looking at Amma’s example,
the reason we fail to appreciate our oneness is that we are either
identifying with the pot, the water in the pot or—at best—the
reflection in the water in the pot. We are forgetting the original
sun. In Amma’s example, the various pots represent our physical
bodies. At this level, some of us are big round pots, some tall
skinny flute-like pots, some white, some brown, etc. The water
in the various pots represents our individual minds—some of
us have calm-water minds, some agitated-water minds, some
muddy-water minds, some pure-water minds, etc. According to
Vedànta, the sun reflected in each pot is getting closer to the
permanent reality, but is still not our true nature. It is but a
reflection of the atma in our mind, what some Vedànta scholars
refer to as cidàbhàsa—reflected consciousness. Our true nature is
the sun—the original consciousness. The original consciousness
is one and the same for all. It is not modified by the conditions
of the reflecting medium of the mind/water. This is the true
eternal nature of all of us. An atma-jnani like Amma roots his
identity and the identity of every aspect of creation—sentient
and insentient—in the original consciousness. They are able to
discriminate themselves and others not only from the physical
body and mind, but also from consciousness as reflected in
the mind. Identifying with that true self, they see themselves in
others and others in themselves.
48
Amritashtakam
It is our obsession with our differences that prevents us
from appreciating our oneness. The atma is the ultimate reality
of each of us—whole, complete and infinite. Beyond that shared
and permanent reality, I will experience a certain set of finite,
internal and external changing phenomena; you will experience
a different set. Regardless, these temporary experiences have
absolutely no bearing on the infinite shared reality of who we
are—the original consciousness. As Swàmì Dayànanda Sarasvatì,
a popular Vedànta teacher, said, we should consider our
individual body, mind and senses as an addition to the whole,
not a diminution.
The jñànì’s complete and total understanding of the oneness
of the atma is the source of his compassion. We all love ourselves.
We never get tired of feeding ourselves, of bathing ourselves, of
striving to better ourselves, of comforting and indulging ourselves.
When it comes to ourselves, it is a lifelong labor of love. Amma
says that the atma-jnani has understood that his self does not
end at the confines of his physical body but, in fact, pervades
all bodies. He knows that the phenomenon of individuality is
a mere illusion. This understanding has registered within him
to such a depth that his response to the suffering of others is
100 percent in tune with that reality. It is, as Amma always says,
“Suppose the left hand is injured. Does the right hand say, ‘Oh,
that’s the left hand; it has nothing to do with me?’ No, the right
hand immediately presses and soothes the left hand, applies
medicine if needed. This is because it does not see the left hand
as different from itself. If we have true spiritual understanding,
this is how we will react to the suffering of all beings.”
I remember once in response to someone’s question, Amma
was explaining the nature of her darsan—why she just naturally
embraces everyone and showers them with affection. She said,
“It’s just the outward flow of Amma’s inherent compassion. That
49
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
flow happens spontaneously when you come to Amma. Just as
leaves flutter when the wind arrives, just as sweetness is the
inherent nature of a fruit, the motherly sentiment, the flow of
compassion, is Amma’s inherent nature. What can Amma do?
The feeling of oneness is very real to her. A cow may be black
or white or red, but the milk is always white. Similarly, there
is only one atma, not many. It only appears as many to those
who think of themselves as the jìvatma.
1
 That’s all there is to
it. Amma doesn’t feel that distinction.” Thus, Amma has said
very clearly that her compassion is a direct outcome of the fact
that “the feeling of oneness is very real to her.” It is Amma’s
atma-jnanam—her knowledge that the self in her is the self in
all beings. Her compassion is all-pervasive because her sense of
self is all-pervasive.
Several years back someone showed me a short story that
reflects this aspect of Amma. 2
 The story is about a couple that
finds an undernourished, abandoned puppy in their backyard.
These are good people, and they feel the puppy is now—by
whatever twist of fate—their responsibility. The puppy is cute
enough, but they immediately realize it has a problem. In its
thus-far short life it has been horribly mistreated. As a result, it
barks constantly, and when anyone tries to offer it comfort, it
whimpers, cowers with fear and urinates. It is simply terrified
of anything and everything—especially humans.
Despite their attempts to rehabilitate the animal with their
affection and care, the puppy’s condition remains the same, and
the couple is soon faced with the proposition of accepting a 12-year
responsibility for which there is no foreseeable reward. The puppy
offers no sense of companionship. It will never become a guard
1 The jìvatma is the atma when ignorantly seen as conditioned by the body,
mind and senses.
2 Richard Ford, “Puppy,” The New Yorker, December 24, 2001.
50
Amritashtakam
dog. It will not even give them the satisfaction of seeing it full
of joy—for, ostensibly, it feels no joy. In the end, the couple does
what most anyone else finding himself in such a situation would
do. They put the dog into the back of their car and drive it to
the animal shelter, trying to ignore as best they can what they
know in their hearts to be true: no one is ever going to pick it
out as a pet and, after five days, it will be euthanized.
In the story, this is a difficult moment for the couple, but
after they get home they quickly fall back into their hectic routines
and, more or less, forget all about the dog. About a week later,
the husband—who is narrating the story—suddenly remembers
the dog, and realizes that, by now, it has most certainly been put
to sleep. At this time he remorsefully reflects that the puppy was
“a casualty of the limits we all place on our sympathy.”
It is true. The compassion of one who has yet to understand
his true self and fully assimilate that knowledge will always
be limited. If we are honest, we will admit to seeing this in
ourselves. Our compassion has borders, and when those borders
are crossed, we retreat from kindness; we retract our generosity.
We find ourselves saying things like, “I wish I could help, but I
have to think of myself also.” However, when reading this story it
occurred to me that no one has ever fallen casualty to the limits
of Amma’s sympathy because Amma’s sympathy and compassion
simply have no limits.
The atma-jnani’s compassion has no limits because his
sense of self has no limits. An individual’s compassion ultimately
ends where his sense of self ends. The jñànì understands that
any perception of a boundary point wherein he ends and others
begin is a misperception based on self-misconception and is to
be ignored. As Amma said above when asked about her darsan,
“The feeling of oneness is very real to me.” This is why when
Amma sees someone suffering, she immediately reaches out to
51
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
comfort them. It is why, when she sees someone without a house,
she wants to give them a house; why, when she sees someone
without means to proper education, she wants to give them a
proper education; why, when she sees someone without food,
she wants to feed them; why, when she sees someone without
love, she wants to love them. For Amma, the impulse to help
others is as natural as the impulse to wipe the tears that fall
from her own eyes.
Some time ago I heard a true story about a young doctor
volunteering in a remote mountain hospital in Haiti.1
 It was
past midnight, pouring rain, and she was desperately struggling
to transport a seven-year-old boy dying from cancer to a more
sophisticated institution. The tumor had started in his nasal
region but had grown rapidly backward and was now pushing
into his spine. The boy’s life was fading, and the woman was
literally racing against time, bouncing along the mountain roads
in some poor excuse for an ambulance.
In fact, the hospital where she was trying to take the child
was in America. The boy’s only chance was through a procedure
available only in Boston. Yet, all the while, in the young doctor’s
head a debate was raging: The boy was dying. Even if she got him
to Boston, his chances were slim. He was going to have to be
airlifted, and the cost was going to be more than $20,000. The
head of her charitable institution was away, and she herself had
pushed for the decision to move forward. Thus, as she bounced
through the jungle to the airport, she doubted if she was doing
the right thing. Was she wasting money that could be spent on
other sick people with a higher chance of survival?
Eventually, the ambulance came to a bridge. Due to the
massive rains, the stream over which the bridge passed was
1 Tracy Kidder, Mountains Beyond Mountains: The Quest of Dr. Paul Farmer,
A Man Who Would Cure the World, Random House, 2003.
52
Amritashtakam
flooded and had risen beyond the height of the bridge-deck.
Crossing would be extremely dangerous, but they had no
choice. When the ambulance entered the bridge, the headlights
submerged and everything went pitch black. Overcome with fear
of her own mortality, the doctor found herself thinking, “I can’t
die. I have so much life left.” Then, before she knew it, they were
on other side—safe. She gave a sigh of relief, and instantly had
a moment of clarity. She thought: “Okay, remember that: ‘If it’s
your life, it’s always the most important thing.’”
The young doctor realized that if it had been her lying there,
there would be no question as to whether or not the $20,000
was an acceptable financial risk. She’d have risked the World
Bank. Understanding this, she got the clarity to move forward
without doubting her decision.
This is how it is with one who has become established in
self-knowledge. Identifying with others’ pain, fears, dreams and
needs, the enlightened individual gives as readily as if they were
his own.
There is one more important thing to note: While the atma-jnani willingly enters the chaos of the lives of the suffering, he
himself never becomes lost in that chaos. If we observe Amma, at
one level we can see the sorrow and joy of the people who come
to her reflected in her. On another level, she never loses sight
that her true nature is far-removed from anything and everything.
I remember one time a journalist asked Amma what makes
Amma happy, and Amma said, “On one level, the happiness
of the world is Amma’s happiness. When people are happy,
Amma is happy. When people are sad, Amma is sad. However,
in the innermost core, Amma is not attached to anything. She
is always happy and peaceful in all circumstances, regardless of
the external circumstances.”
53
One Without a Sense of “Mine”
NIRMAMAÃ
Nirmamaã means that the parabhakta has no sense of “mine”—no
sense of mine with regard to possessions, to achievements, to
relationships, to anything external.
In the mid-1980s, Amma’s Asram was just a few thatched
huts. Even though we never felt it was austere because we were
so immersed in Amma’s love and compassion, the fact remains
that we only had enough money to eat one full meal a day and
sometimes we would even go without that. Myself and the other
brahmacàrìs only had a few decent shirts among us, and we would
share them as per the need of the day. We never had a surplus of
rice and vegetables. We lived completely hand-to-mouth. Since I
had worked in a bank before joining the Asram, I felt like I was
the only one who really understood the importance of money.
I was often irritated with how, despite our lack of resources,
Amma was always giving funds donated to the Asram to poor
people. A woman would come telling Amma about her lack of
money for her daughter’s marriage, and the next thing I would
know Amma would be calling someone to run and get the gold
necklace that had been donated the day before. Knowing my
place as a disciple, I would usually keep quiet, but inside I would
be irritated, thinking, “Amma, we’re poorer than she is!”
At one point, a man who was an expert in vàstu éàstra 1
visited the Asram. Seeing its layout, he immediately told me that it
was inauspicious. He pointed to a large open area through which
many people entered and exited. He said, “You cannot leave that
1 Ancient Indian texts on the science of physical structures, with focus
on architectural design, layout, measurements, ground preparation, space
arrangement and spatial geometry.
54
Amritashtakam
space without a wall. If you do, all the Asram’s wealth will exit
through there.” I immediately brought him to inform Amma.
Amma listened to him intently and then said, “Son, I want it
like that. For worldly people, such a layout may be inauspicious
because in their view life is about gaining money. Amma doesn’t
see things that way. This Asram is not Amma’s, nor is anything
in it. It all belongs to the world. What is more auspicious than
money leaving to help the poor and needy?”
Amma’s view is that nothing is hers. The Asram, its resources,
its institutions, anything donated—everything belongs to the
world, she says. Moreover, Amma always points out that even if
we ostensibly possess something—be it an object, a relationship,
an experience, etc—we will not be able to take it with us when
we die. “Renounce ownership—consider all things as God’s and
enjoy them,” she says. “This world is a temporary stop. You are
here for a short period, as a visitor. Due to your ignorance, you
divide everything, every inch of land, as yours and theirs. The
piece of land you claim as your own has belonged to many others
before. Now the previous owners are buried in it. Today, it may
be your turn to play the role of owner, but remember, one day
you too will disappear. Then another person will come and fill
your shoes. So, is there any meaning in claiming ownership?”
Amma often says that the jñànì has no sense of “mine”
because he does not see anything as separate from him. In order
to see something as mine, I must first see that thing as existing
outside of me: my house, my pen, my brother, my car... The
atma-jnani has understood that not only is the atma his true
essence, but it is also the essence of the entire universe—both the
sentient and insentient. According to Vedànta, the atma is the
ultimate subatomic particle, as it were. So, the jñànì knows that
everything he sees within and without is nothing but he himself
with a different superficial name and form. Seeing the world
55
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
with this vision of oneness, how can he possibly call anything as
“his”? It may be “him,” but never “his.” This is from the ultimate
perspective, wherein all names and forms are understood to have
one’s own self as their substratum.
Here, some may have a doubt: “Other than the fact that a
sense of ownership is an obstacle to atma-jnanam, why would I
want to attain it? The previous qualities—non-hatred, friendliness,
compassion—all seem like nice things. However, some people
derive a lot of happiness from owning things. We may doubt,
“If I give up my sense of ownership, won’t I actually lose out?”
Amma says that it is just the opposite: “When we give everything,
we are, in truth, gaining everything. When we surrender all the
perishable things, what we realize in return is the imperishable
atma—our true self. When we think, ‘My land... my money...
my children...,’ etc, our world is contracting. When we renounce
the attitude of ‘mine,’ everything becomes ours. Then, there are
no differences. In that state, there is no difference between God
and us. That is why it said that for one who knows the essence,
the whole world becomes his wealth.”
In fact, claims born of our sense of “mine” often render us
foolish in the eyes of others. We become like the middleman
for a hospital who, trying to get a commission for bringing in a
patient, pushes his way to the front of a crowd standing around
an accident victim. “Stand back! Clear the way! He’s a relative of
mine! He’s a relative of mine!” he shouts. Yet, upon reaching the
victim, the man sees not an injured human but a dead donkey—
and everyone else sees not one jackass but two.
More importantly, it is, in fact, our sense of “mine” that
is the source of all our worry in life. We don’t worry about our
neighbor’s children; we worry about our children. We don’t worry
about our neighbor’s health; we worry about our health. That said,
just because we don’t worry about our neighbor doesn’t mean that
56
Amritashtakam
we won’t be there for him when he is in need. If he is sick, we
may cook for him and help him clean the house, etc. If we see
his child crying, we will hug the child, ask what is wrong and
try to solve the problem. Despite helping our neighbor, we don’t
fret over his troubles. We lovingly do what is required and follow
up if necessary, but we don’t stay up all night worrying about
whether or not the particular situation is going to be okay. So, in
giving up the sense of “mine,” the only thing we lose is anxiety.
Total eradication of our sense of ownership can only come
from self-knowledge. This is because the foundation of our sense
of ownership is our misunderstanding that we are limited by
the body-mind-sense complex. 1
 Self-knowledge directly destroys
this misunderstanding and thus, indirectly, destroys the sense
of ownership born of it.
How do we know if we are suffering from a sense of
ownership? Very simple: worry. Worrying about something is
a clear sign that we feel a sense of ownership toward it. When
we find ourselves worrying over something, we should remind
ourselves of these Vedantic principles. When we worry about
our children, we should remind ourselves that we neither own
them nor, ultimately, can we even control them. We can only
advise them and provide them support; we cannot force them
to accept our advice. Many people think that worry is proof that
we love someone, and if we don’t worry about someone we don’t
really love them. This is total delusion. Worry has nothing to
do with true love. It only has to do with a sense of possession.
Moreover, worrying never helped anyone—neither the worrier,
nor the one worried over. Analyze the situation, decide what
you can and cannot do to help it, perform that action and then
move forward.
1 Self-identification with the body-mind-sense complex is called ahaêkàra. Its
negation is the topic of the next chapter.
57
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
Not feeling ownership with regards to our possessions and
family members, etc, is not easy. This is one reason the sannyàsì
does not own anything; his renunciation of all possessions and
relations removes all scope for possession-based worry in his
mind. This allows him the mental freedom to totally focus on
self-knowledge until his understanding and resultant detachment
are firm enough that, even if he were loaded with possessions,
there could be no sense of ownership. However, Amma doesn’t
want us all to take sannyàsa and become monks. She says, what is
most important is “inner sannyàsa.” This is the inner conviction
that none of our possessions or family members are really ours,
but that, rather, they are all on loan from God, and God can
take them back at any moment.
Amma often explains this inner-sannyàsa attitude with the
example of the bird on the dry twig. She says, “A spiritually
oriented householder should be like a bird perched on a dry
twig. The bird knows that the twig can break at any moment.
Therefore, it will be ready to take off at any time. Likewise, a
householder should always remain aware of the truth that his
relationships and possessions will not always be with him. At
any moment they can snap and he will have to fly.”
So, if we want to reduce our sense of ownership, we should
learn to start seeing everything that we previously considered
as “ours” as “God’s,” remembering that God can take back the
things he lent to us at any time.
In January 2001, when an earthquake with a magnitude of
7.6 hit the Bhuj District of Gujarat, a reported 20,000 people
were killed, 167,000 were injured, 400,000 homes were destroyed
and 600,000 people were rendered homeless. In March of 2002,
Amma herself came to Bhuj in order to give darsan to the disaster
victims and present them with the keys to 1,200 new homes the
Asram had built for them. When Amma asked them if they were
58
Amritashtakam
sad about the loss of their loved ones, one of them responded,
“Amma, we are not sad. God had given to us, and now He has
taken away.” This is inner sannyàsa—an attitude that must be
there if we want to foster a mind that is free from worry, which
is essential to attain atma-jnanam.
59
One Without a Separate
Sense of “I”
NIRAHAÊKÀRAÃ
The next sign of the parabhakta, Sri Krishna says, is nirahaêkàraã.
The word ahaêkàra literally means “the ‘I’-maker.” Thus,
nirahaêkàraã means “one in whom the thought of ‘I’ has gone
away.”1
 Before we can understand what is meant by “eradicating
ahaêkàra,” we first must understand what is meant by ahaêkàra.
We should note that the “I” itself is not the problem; the
problem is our misconception regarding this “I.” After all, the
most famous Vedantic statement from the Upanishads is ahaë
brahmàsmi—“I am brahman.”2
 Therefore, what the atma-jnani
has eradicated is not his sense of “I,” but his identification of
that “I” with the body, mind and senses. That is, he has come
to identify his “I” with pure awareness, pure consciousness. In
that rediscovering of himself, he comes to clearly see that he is
neither the one performing actions, nor the one undergoing the
various experiences of life. Furthermore, he understands that he
is not even the one willing his actions. He is, at best, a witness
to all these phenomena. This is what is meant by nirahaêkàraã.
The result of this knowledge is total freedom, total
fearlessness, total selflessness. For just as self-knowledge frees us
from the misconception of ownership when it comes to external
objects [as explained in the previous chapter on nirmamaã], so too
it frees us from this misconception with regard to the “internal”
object of the body-mind-sense complex.
1 From Sri Sankara’s commentary: nirgatàhaë-pratyayaã—“one in whom the
thought of ‘I’ has gone away.”
2 Bähadàraåyaka Upanishad, 1.4.10
60
Amritashtakam
A famous story illustrates how a jñànì does not see himself
as his physical body and the resultant detachment and selflessness
that such an understanding can foster. Once a devotee was
making a pilgrimage in the Himalayas. There he came across
a wandering monk engaged in meditation. Seeing the radiant
and peaceful look on the monk’s face, the pilgrim reverently sat
down at the his feet and waited for him to open his eyes so that
he could have his blessings. When he did so, he noticed that
one of the monk’s arms had a very bad infection. There were
even maggots crawling on it. Soon the monk opened his eyes,
saw the pilgrim sitting there and raised his hand to bless him.
As he did so, one of the maggots fell off his arm and landed
on the ground. The monk quickly reached down and picked up
the maggot and placed it back on his arm, saying, “Oh, my little
one. You almost lost your dinner.”
The story is a bit extreme, but is what Amma does really
so different? Ignoring the physically detrimental ramifications
of embracing a million people every year, Amma—with total
detachment—has offered her physical body to the world, allowing
all of us to take spiritual and emotional nourishment from her
physical embrace. Like the monk in the story, Amma doesn’t see
her body as hers; she sees it as the world’s.
Nirahaêkàraã does not end with disidentification from
the body and senses. It also extends to disidentification with
one’s mind. Occasionally people directly ask Amma if she has
attained self-realization. Amma always responds by saying that
she makes no claims. Some people hear this and think Amma
is just being humble. From one perspective, that is true, but
the ultimate reason Amma makes no claims is that she doesn’t
identify with her mind. What is it that attains self-realization?
The atma certainly does not attain it. The atma performs no
actions and experiences no fruits. It is, at best, a mere witness
61
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
and is ever liberated. What attains self-realization is the mind.
Self-realization is the mental realization that one is the atma. Since
self-realization is something that takes place in the mind, how
can an atma-jnani—who identifies exclusively with the atma—ever
respond “yes” to the question, “Are you self-realized?”
To better understand how the jñànì’s total identification with
the atma leads to a sense of non-ownership from both external
objects as well as from the body-mind-sense complex, it is helpful
to compare the atma to light pervading a room. Many people may
enter and exit the room, many events may take place there, but
the light cannot claim ownership of, or identification with, any of
these people and phenomena. So, too, it is with the self—the pure
consciousness that pervades and illumines all of our thoughts,
sense experiences and physical movements. Thus, the atma-jnani
knows that, despite interacting with people at the level of the
body, from the level of the atma there is no such interaction.
He is the consciousness that illumines all experiences, but he
himself has no experiences, no relationships, no possessions.
Thus, there is nothing he can call “his.”
There is a Malayalam bhajan Amma sings that presents this
view of non-ownership with a beautiful metaphor:
gandha-vàhanan pòle bandhiccu sarvattiluë
bandhamillàtte vazhàn-uîîil nì vasikkaåè1
The line above means: “O please dwell within me, helping me to
live like the wind, having a bond with everything, yet being bound
by nothing.” Thus, the atma-jnani, knowing his true nature to
be pure consciousness, knows that although the body interacts
with various people and things and the mind has thoughts about
1 “Cintakkaîkk-Anytaë Vann-En Antaraêgattil Pontuë”
62
Amritashtakam
various people and things, none of these ultimately have any
connection with him, who is pure consciousness, pure awareness.
In meditation, we can clearly experience this. We can close
our eyes, remain quiet and begin observing various phenomena
that enter the stage of our mind: the perception of sound... the
perception of a sensation... a feeling of impatience... a memory
of Amma... a memory of our father... a desire to have coffee with
a friend of ours... If we switch our focus from the phenomena
to being the witness of the phenomena, we can see that none
of these sense experiences, feelings, emotions, memories, ideas
and desires—despite being mental phenomena—have any real
connection with us, the witness.
Thus, “I” is not the problem. The problem is our erroneous
understanding about “I.” When we say, “I am the body,” the
“I” and the “am” are both very real. The only mistake is in our
equating ourselves with the body-mind-sense complex. In truth,
the correct statement is not “I am the body,” but “I am pure
bliss.” The atma-jnani has realized this.
Another way of looking at this is that the atma-jnani’s
sense of “I” has expanded to include the entire universe. On
one level, he knows he is pure consciousness, but on another
level he knows that this entire universe has manifested from that
consciousness. Thus, his sense of self has become all-pervasive
in that he knows that the ultimate building block of creation, as
it were, is the consciousness that is he himself. Either way, he is
nirahaêkàraã—one without a limited sense of “I.”
There is a beautiful Malayalam prayer that Amma sometimes
quotes, which illustrates this second interpretation:
ànanda-cinmaya harè gòpàlikàramaåa
ñàn-enne bhàvam-atu tònnàyka vèåam-iha
tònnunnatàkilakhilaë ñàn-itenna-vazhi
tònnèåamè varada nàràyaåàya namaã
63
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
O Hari, who is pervaded with bliss and consciousness, in
whom the gopikas delight, May I never feel the notion of
“I.” If I must, then let me feel “I am everything.” O Giver
of boons, I bow down to you, Nàràyaåa.1
When discussing nirmamaã in the previous chapter, we said
that the presence of our sense of “mine” is indicated by worry.
Since the sense of “mine” is subtle, it is hard to view directly; we
have to discover it by its symptom. Ahaêkàraã is even subtler.
Therefore, it is helpful to detect it via its symptoms as well. One
of the primary symptoms of identifying with the body-mind is
feeling that we are the doer—the agent of our actions. In fact,
ahaêkàra is often defined as this identification: “‘I am the doer’
is ahaêkàra,” says Tattva Bodha. 2
 Anytime we get caught up
in the feeling that “I am the doer,” we can be assured that we
are identifying with the body-mind. We can then use that as a
reminder to bring back our Vedantic understanding of our true
nature. Obviously, it is not that the atma-jnani ceases to perform
actions. On the contrary, he may perform more actions than
one who is spiritually ignorant. However, irrespective of the
jñànì’s level of activity, he can clearly demarcate himself from
those actions. We will discuss this at more when we come to
the quality of éubhàéubha parityàgì [one who renounces both the
auspicious and inauspicious].
Other symptoms of ahaêkàra are pride, arrogance, hubris,
haughtiness, egomaniacal behavior, etc. In fact, these qualities
are sometimes simply referred to as ahaêkàra. This is because
they are all rooted in the belief that this limited “I,” comprised
of the body and mind, is the ultimate reality. When we conceive
of our self in this manner, the natural result will be two-fold:
1 Harinàma-Kìrttanaë, verse 3, by Tuñcattu Ràmànujan Ezhuttacchan, 16th C.
2 Tattva Bodhaã, 7.3.2.2: ahaë-kartà ahaêkàraã.
64
Amritashtakam
we will fear that we may be rendered even more limited, and we
will long to become less limited.
Arrogance is a direct product of ahaêkàra because the more
identified one is with the limited self, the less willing he will be to
acquiesce to the desires of others. Why? Because subconsciously
he will feel that to do so is to concede a piece of himself, which
he already perceives as being far too limited. Similarly, such a
person will often try to impose his will upon others because he
is trying to expand his sense of “I,” to make it less limited, by
controlling others. This is how arrogance and egomania, etc,
arise from ahaêkàra.
On the other hand, sometimes people appear to be humble,
but their humility is merely an expression of an inferiority
complex. An inferiority complex is just as much a symptom of
ahaêkàra as a superiority complex. In both cases, the individual
has identified with his mind and the illusion it creates that “I am
bound by the body-mind-sense complex.” The only difference
between the egomaniac and someone who suffers from an
inferiority complex is that the former believes his “I” is superior
to that of others, and the latter believes that his “I” is second-rate.
In either case, their concepts are founded on ignorance about
their true nature.
Since, ahaêkàra and its eradication are inner phenomena,
we cannot directly observe them in other people. However, in
mahatmas, we can observe the humility born of non-identification
with the body-mind. This is what we see in Amma—someone who
is willing to bow down to anything and everything, someone
who is always willing to listen to the input of others. Seeing
the divinity within every aspect of creation—both sentient and
insentient—the impulse to bow down before others is innate in
Amma. As we said, Amma makes no claims with regard to her
status; she has no feeling that “I am a great atma-jnani; let others
65
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
bow down to me.” Identifying not with the mind, but only with
the atma, she is humbler than the humblest.
Every time Amma takes the dais, she bows down before
everyone assembled. While I am used to this behavior of Amma’s,
there was one time that the profundity of Amma’s humility struck
me in particular. The occasion was a Sanskrit, English and yoga
camp held at the Asram for children who had been affected by
the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami. On the final day of the camp,
Amma came for a question-and-answer session with the children.
In India, one bows down before another under one of several
circumstances: the person should either be an elder, superior in
a field of knowledge, a sannyàsì or a mahatma. Yet, as soon as
Amma stepped out before the children, she immediately offered
her prostrations to all 6,000 of them. According to the traditional
texts dealing with proper conduct1
, there was no reason for Amma
to do this—she was older than all of them, certainly she was more
knowledgeable, none of them were sannyàsìs, and Amma herself
is a mahatma. However, age is from the perspective of the body,
and knowledge and spiritual greatness are from the perspective
of the mind. Refusing to identify with either and seeing each
child as an embodiment of the supreme, Amma spontaneously
and sincerely offered her humble prostrations. In fact, I have
not seen anyone else bow down before the audience like Amma.
They may say, “I offer my prostrations to everyone,” but who but
Amma literally bows down?
1 Dharma éàstras
66
One Who Is the Same in
Hardship & Comfort
SAMA-DUÃKHA-SUKHAÃ
The next quality Sri Krishna gives for the parabhakta is samaduãkha-sukhaã—“one who is the same in sorrow and happiness.”
It is easy to become confused upon hearing this. It sounds like an
oxymoron because it is referring to the mind of the atma-jnani,
and a mind that is experiencing happiness is in no way the same
as a mind that is experiencing sorrow. They are diametrically
opposite experiences. Thus, we should be careful when we come
across this expression, which appears often—not just in the
Bhagavad-Gita and other scriptures but also in talks by Amma.
When we see this expression, we should take duãkha and sukha
not as the mental emotions of sorrow and happiness, but as
circumstances in which it is common to experience sorrow and
happiness. Examples of duãkha would then be realizing your car
has been stolen, learning you have failed an exam, hearing that
someone you love has been diagnosed with an incurable disease,
etc. Examples of sukha would be winning a million dollars in
the lottery, learning you’ve been given a desired promotion,
etc. If we take this interpretation, then Krishna is saying that the
atma-jnani remains mentally equipoised in both of these poles
of experience. If someone tells him that they think he is great,
he smiles serenely. If someone tells him they think he is an
ignoramus, he also smiles serenely. Inside he remains blissful.
To understand why the atma-jnani retains mental equanimity
despite whatever happens, it is helpful to look at why people
who lack self-knowledge fail to do this. People become angry
with someone when they think that person is obstructing the
67
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
fulfillment of one of their desires. The more intense the desire,
the more intense the anger. What dictates the intensity of the
desire? Just as anger is directly proportional to desire, so too desire
is directly proportional to how much one believes a particular
object to be a source of happiness. This is why an atma-jnani
never becomes angry: He is not under the illusion that any object
in the universe is a source of happiness. As such, his actions are
never motivated by the desire to obtain happiness. Therefore,
if someone prevents him from obtaining an object or doing an
action, no anger results.
A question may arise: If an atma-jnani like Amma does
not see any object in the universe, whatsoever, as a source of
happiness, then where does his happiness come from? The answer
is that it comes from the self, his true nature. The jñànì is, as
Krishna says in the Gita, àtmanyeva àtmanaã tuçâaã—“Content in
the self, through the self alone.”1
 In fact, this is the very reason
why he does not see any object as a source of happiness. He
knows that there is only one source of happiness in the entire
universe and that is the atma, which he has firmly understood
and assimilated to be his true nature. When people develop a
fondness for any sense object, be it a person, place or thing, it
comes from the superimposition of the splendor that is in fact
one’s true nature onto that object. 2
 The atma-jnani has no such
error in perception.
As stated in the Introduction, all of these qualities
enumerated by Krishna are both effects of self-knowledge as
well as required mental conditions for self-knowledge to take
place. As such, true mental equanimity comes only as a result
of atma-jnanam. However, relative mental equanimity must be
attained in order to understand and assimilate self-knowledge.
1 Bhagavad-Gita, 2.55
2 éobhana adhyàsaã
68
Amritashtakam
The agitated mind is not really available for our use. Someone
praises us and it is dancing on the ceiling; someone criticizes
us and it is either depressed or fuming with anger. All of these
various mental phenomena—depression, worry, anxiety, agitation,
anger, excitement, over-elation—render the mind ineffective. A
depressed mind can neither learn nor reflect nor ruminate on
what it has learnt; likewise a mind soaring in elation. Such minds
are unavailable in the here and now for serious spiritual pursuit.
The primary spiritual practice for attaining this relative level of
mental equanimity is karma yoga. Krishna says this himself with
his famous definition of karma yoga:
yoga-sthaã kuru karmàåi saêgaë tyaktvà dhanañjaya |
siddhyasiddhyoã samo bhùtvà samatvaë yoga ucyate ||
Perform actions, O Dhanañjaya, being fixed in [karma]
yoga—renouncing attachments and being mentally
equanimous in success and failure. Equanimity is said to
be [karma] yoga.
1
However, we should understand that here, in the Amritashtakam,
Krishna is not speaking about mental equanimity born of karma
yoga. In karma yoga, we attain a relative amount of mental
equanimity from accepting everything that comes to us in life—
both hardships and fortunate circumstances—as God’s prasàdam
[gift]. However, through that attitude, one will retain a sense of
division between himself and God. He sees himself as God’s
devotee and performs his actions as a worship of God. Thus, a
sense of non-identity with God is retained. Àtma-jñànam is the
very knowledge that my true nature and God’s true nature are
one and the same: the eternally existent blissful consciousness that
pervades all of creation. Thus, the atma-jnani’s mental equanimity
1 Gita, 2.58
69
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
comes not from seeing all things as God’s gift but from his
continued appreciation of the reality that bliss itself is his true
nature and that all names and forms are but eternally changing
superficialities to which he serves as the eternal substratum. As
Sant Jñàneévar writes in his commentary on this verse, “He is
like the ocean, which is full even if it doesn’t rain.”
In his commentary on this quality, Sri Sankara makes an
important point. He writes: “Whoever in whom hardship and
comfort do not give rise to attachment or aversion is samaduãkha-sukhaã.” 1
 Sri Sankara is pointing out that when the
atma-jnani undergoes a circumstance that most people would
label adverse, it does not create within his psyche a negative
impression that in the future will make him recoil from similar
circumstances. Similarly, when he undergoes a circumstance that
most people would label pleasant or comfortable, no positive
impression is made in his psyche that prompts him to pursue
similar circumstances in the future. Only such a person can
truly be considered free. Everyone else is simply reacting. It’s
not that the atma-jnani isn’t aware of the law of cause and effect.
Of course he knows that certain actions and circumstances will
bring physical pain and problems and that certain others will
bring physical comfort and ease. Nevertheless, his decisions are
not dictated by that knowledge. It is but one minor factor for
him to take into consideration when making his choices. The
primary factor is the welfare of the world.
For example, as Amma does most every year, in July 2011,
at the request of devotees, Amma travelled to Japan to give a
week or so of programs there. The fact that parts of Japan were
still considered dangerous due to spillage from nuclear reactors
damaged by the Tòhuko Earthquake a few months before did not
dissuade her. The other swàmìs and myself were not happy that
1 duãkhe-sukhe dveça-ràgeyoã apravartake yasya sa sama-duãkha-sukhaã
70
Amritashtakam
Amma was going, but we at least took solace in the fact that the
parts of Japan where Amma’s programs were being held were far
away from the danger zone. During the course of the programs,
many victims of the disaster came for Amma’s darsan. I could
see the fear and insecurity fading from their faces as Amma
compassionately showered them with her love and affection.
Toward the end of the day, after Amma gave darsan to one more
such victim of the disaster, Amma turned to the brahmacàrì in
charge of the Japan programs and said, “I’m going to go there.”
He didn’t really take Amma seriously, but then a few minutes later
Amma was asking him to start making the travel arrangements.
The next day, Amma and the rest of us were in a caravan of
cars driving to Tagajo, just 68 miles away from the still-leaking
Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant. Worse yet, in order to
get there, we had to drive just 40 miles from the reactor itself.
In Tagajo, Amma visited an evacuation center where more than
100 people who were still homeless were being accommodated.
Despite the fact that no one could ensure us that the region was
completely safe from the leakage, Amma stayed there, embracing,
consoling, and wiping the tears of each and every person, showing
us all what real courage and compassion are. Amma also visited
the seashore in Shichigahama, offering prayers for the peace of
those who had died and for the restoration of harmony between
humankind and nature.
I mention this story because it perfectly illustrates how
Amma, as a sama-duãkha-sukhaã, is not guided by likes and
dislikes but only by her selfless desire to console and care for
suffering humanity. Did Amma know that going to the area was
dangerous? Of course. Amma also knew that the trip itself would
be difficult due to the post-disaster road conditions. Furthermore,
she knew it would delay her arrival in Osaka, where she was
scheduled to hold her next program, to the extent that she would
71
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
arrive just a few hours before it was due to start. Yet, none of
that deterred Amma. Due to her self-knowledge, her choices were
not informed by selfish likes and dislikes but by her boundless
love and compassion.
Another famous example is Amma’s interaction with a leper
named Dattan who was known for begging around Oachira,
a town not far from the Asram. His wounds were so bad that
Amma would only call him forward at the very end of darsan.
Otherwise, seeing the blood and pus that Amma would get on
her sàri from holding him, no one else would have followed for
darsan. In the beginning, he was so putrid that, if I was standing
beside Amma when he came for darsan, I would have to hold
my nose. Yet, for years, Amma would not only hold him but
she would tend to his wounds, cleaning his infected skin with
her own lips and tongue. Seeing his physical recovery, it is my
firm faith that Amma healed him. At the same time, I do not
believe that this was the primary reason Amma would take him
into her arms. I believe that whether Amma could heal him or
not did not matter to her. Neither did whether or not she would
become sick from their interactions. Her attitude was simple:
“Let fate bring what it may, I will have dried the eyes of a child
in pain.” This is the type of freedom that comes from atmajnanam—the freedom to stop living in the shadow of our likes
and dislikes and start living in the sunlight of a truly altruistic
and expansive love.
Some people may ask, “What is wrong with being happy
when good things happen and sad when bad things happen? Isn’t
that the nature of life?” There is nothing wrong with it, but we
should understand that life doesn’t have to be that way. If you want
it to be that way, you are welcome to it, but if we reflect, we will
see that when we allow objects to become sources of happiness
for us, our joy and sorrow will be directly proportional. That is,
72
Amritashtakam
as much joy as I experience when gaining a longed-for object,
that much sorrow I will experience when losing it. Moreover,
since every single thing in this universe is non-eternal, we will
definitely one day lose every object we attain. Thus, as much joy
we experience, that much sorrow. Viewing the human experience
from this perspective, the scriptures refuse to term the enjoyment
derived from sense objects as “happiness” at all. This is something
Krishna emphatically says in the fifth chapter of the Gita:
ye hi saësparéajà bhogà duãkha-yonaya eva te |
àdyantavantaã kaunteya na teçu ramate budhaã ||
Whatever enjoyments are born of contact [with sense
objects] are verily wombs of sorrow alone; O Kaunteya, they
have a beginning and an end. No wise man revels in these.1
If you enjoy such an arrangement, you are welcome to it. No one
is forcing spirituality upon anyone. However, if you are aiming
for the highest goal, then this attitude is insufficient. Moreover,
we should also remember that, according to the scriptures, the
pinnacle of happiness one can obtain through objects is but an
infinitesimal fraction of the bliss that is our true nature: “Other
beings live on a particle of this bliss alone.” 2
As discussed, before coming to Vedànta, we should try to
cultivate equanimity, primarily through karma yoga: performing
our professional work, our seva, any spiritual practices we do
such as japa or meditation with the resolve that we are doing
these actions only as a worship of God and have no wish for
any material rewards from them. If grace in the material sphere
comes, the karma yogì accepts it, but that is not his aim. His
1 Gita, 5.22
2 Bähadàraåyaka Upanishad, 6.3.32: etasyaivànandasyànyàni bhùtàni màtràmupajìvanti
73
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
aim is simply to offer the worship to God and accept whatever
comes to him in life—the so-called “good” and the so-called
“bad”—equally, seeing them as God’s gift. In this way, the karma
yogì will become relatively equanimous and will experience some
degree of contentment. This, in turn, will create a mind calm
enough and steady enough to focus on Vedànta.
Once we fully understand Vedànta, we should shift the
cause of our equanimity and contentment from seeing all things
as God’s prasàdam to understanding that we ourselves are the
source of all contentment, peace and bliss, and that all names
and forms are but changing superficialities skating across the
surface of our true self. Abiding in that bliss, let fortune come,
let poverty come, let success come, let failure come—these things
mean nothing to us now, for their relationship is only with
the body and mind, and we know we are not the mind, but
the witness consciousness—the sàkçi caitanyam—that illumines
everything but is ever detached. As we move about in life, as
we perform our work, do our seva, etc, we must reflect in this
manner when the fruits of actions come our way. In closed-eye
meditation, we should bring back the teaching that we are not
the body, not the mind, but consciousness, detached, ever full
and blissful. This cannot be just words. As we allow this thread
of thought regarding our true nature to flow through our mind,
we should affirm it as the truth of our inner reality and appreciate
that the true “I” is, at best, a witness and not the performer of the
actions, nor their instigator, nor the experiencer of their fruits.
74
One Endowed With Forgiveness
KÇAMÌ
Kçamà literally means patience, the ability to forbear; a kçamì
is one endowed with that quality. Kçamà can also be taken in
the sense of “forgiveness” because forgiveness ultimately means
having patience with other human beings, even when they have
violated your sense of right and wrong. In such times, forgiveness
is really our ability to accept their actions and not hold a grudge.
To understand the source of the atma-jnani’s forgiveness,
we only need to review how willing we are to forgive ourselves
because this is exactly how the atma-jnani sees other people—as
his own self. If we are honest, we will see that we have infinite
patience and forgiveness when it comes to our own transgressions.
When we lose our temper with someone, we will say to ourselves,
“Hey, it’s okay. You were tired.” When we fail to live up to our
promises, we tell ourselves, “Hey, no one’s perfect. Don’t be so
hard on yourself.” We have a thousand ways to justify and then
forgive our own actions. Seeing himself in all beings and all
beings in himself, the atma-jnani is just as easy on other people
as we are on ourselves. As Amma always says, “If we accidentally
happen to poke our eye with our own finger, do we punish the
finger? No. We simply try to soothe the pain. Why do we not
punish the finger? Because both are part of us, both are ours.
We see ourselves in both the eye and in the finger. In the same
way, we should be able to see our own self in all beings. If we
can do this, we can easily forgive the mistakes of others.”
I would say that Amma can even be frustratingly forgiving.
Sometimes when I am standing beside Amma people come
to Amma to complain about someone else. Often, I think to
myself, “He’s got a good point. That person is very egoistic, and
75
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
many people have complained about him to me before as well.
In fact, I’ve even seen him in action myself.” Like a fool, I start
thinking that Amma is going to call and give that person a good
dose. However, most of the time, Amma will just say, “Aw... he
is so pàvam.
1
 He’s very innocent. He works so hard.” Everyone
around Amma will probably be thinking, “He’s not pàvam,
Amma. He’s a megalomaniac. In fact, he has other people do the
majority of his work and takes all the credit.” In such situations,
even if, ostensibly, we are right, it is not that Amma is ignorant
of the real situation. Trust me: Amma knows very well who is
hardworking and who is lazy, who is humble and who is egoistic,
who is sincere and who is feigning. At the same time, due to
Amma’s self-knowledge, her heart feels a unity with everyone and,
just as we are very patient with ourselves, Amma has extreme
patience with others as well. Although Amma wants all of us
to cultivate good qualities and become more spiritually mature,
she also knows that you cannot force a flower to bloom. You can
only provide the proper conditions. Then you have to wait and
let nature take its course. In Amma’s own words, “We need to
awaken from within. If Amma tries to force us to change, it’s
like trying to open an egg with a baby bird inside it from the
outside. It will only end in destruction. When an egg breaks
open from within, however, a new creation emerges.”
Although Amma is the embodiment of patience, there are
times when she realizes that continuing to externally accept a
certain person’s behavior will only feed that person’s laziness or
ego—times when she knows that what will be most beneficial is
for her to speak up. So, while in general Amma doesn’t like to
push, if she knows that a good push is required, she will give it.
Sometimes we need that. However, we should note that when
Amma does chastise her disciples, this chastisement is also born
1 One deserving sympathy, Malayalam.
76
Amritashtakam
out of that same feeling of oneness from which her patience and
forgiveness come. I remember, speaking on this topic, Amma
once commented, “I see the negativities of my children as my
own negativities. Therefore, Amma will try to cultivate alertness
and the ability to do the right thing in them. Just as a student
is given tuition1
 for a subject in which he is weak, true help lies
in helping others to correct their errors. Otherwise, what is the
meaning in them calling me ‘Amma’ [mother] and me calling
them ‘children’?”
Amma’s display of patience with her disciples and devotees
may terminate at a point when she feels that they require her
intervention to move forword. However, when it comes to people
who are not disciples or devotees, Amma’s patience seems
limitless. There have been occasions when such people have even
told blatant lies about Amma and the Asram in order to try to
tarnish Amma’s name. Regardless, Amma sees such people as
infants—people who have yet to attain a level of maturity wherein
they are capable of learning from correction. As such, Amma’s
response has always been one of forgiveness. I remember on
one of these occasions, a newspaper reporter asking Amma if
she was planning any reprisal. Amma responded by asking the
reporter a counter question: “If the baby kicks the mother, does
the mother kick the baby in return?”
This is how an enlightened soul views the transgressions of
humankind—both those in general and those specifically against
him. He sees them simply as the actions of ignorant people—
infants. The atma-jnani will never hit back when hit or insult
back when insulted. He will never harbor any thoughts of spite
or revenge. He will never malign the character of the person
attacking him. Not only that, he may not even stop helping such
1 Amma uses the English word “tuition” in its sense of private tutoring sessions.
77
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
people. He simply accepts their actions, never having expected
them to act any differently in the first place.
There is a famous story Amma sometimes tells that
demonstrates this quality of the enlightened soul. A mahatma
saw a scorpion drowning by the bank of a river. He immediately
reached down and scooped it out to save it. Immediately, he was
stung and dropped it. Again he picked it up, and again he was
stung. Yet, he picked it up a third time. At this point, a passerby
asked the mahatma why he was helping the creature despite its
actions. The mahatma replied, “It is the scorpion’s nature to
sting; it is my nature to help.”
In the story, the mahatma has no expectations regarding
the scorpion. Amma says, in fact, it is from our unrealistic
expectations with regard to the behavior of other people that a
lot of our anger and desire for revenge come. She says that we
should drop these expectations. In her own words, “See a frog
as a frog and an elephant as an elephant. Don’t try to make the
cat into a dog or a dog into a cat.” The mahatma knows that very
few people have self-knowledge and even fewer have assimilated
that knowledge fully. Thus, most simply act according to their
tendencies. Some have cultivated good tendencies and thus are
capable of acting in a responsible manner. Some are trying to
do this but have yet to accomplish it. Others are still completely
in the grip of their selfish desires. Understanding that this is the
nature of the world, the mahatma accepts everything as God’s
play. Sometimes, God’s play is a comedy, sometimes a tragedy.
Regardless, the mahatma, like a dispassionate audience member,
simply witnesses, never giving the play any more reality than it
deserves.
When explaining this quality, Sri Sankara says that even
when the atma-jnani is physically or verbally abused, he remains
78
Amritashtakam
unperturbed.1
 This implies a mind in which reaction to insult
and violence does not enter even as an impulse to be swiftly
rejected. Such complete patience and forgiveness are only possible
as effects of fully assimilating atma-jnanam. They are born of the
atma-jnani’s total disidentification with his physical body and
total identification with the atma. When someone is abusing the
atma-jnani, regardless of how he chooses to respond physically
or verbally, within he always remains unaffected. It’s like that
old joke wherein a police officer sees a man leaning against an
illegally parked car and issues him a ticket. The man responds,
“If you think I’m moving this car just because you’ve written
that ticket, you’re a fool.” The policeman then smashes the
car’s headlight and writes another ticket for the newly observed
violation. The man says, “I said, ‘You’d be a fool,’ because it’s not
my car.” This is how it is when someone tries to get a rise out
of the atma-jnani by insulting him. To him, it’s like the insulter
is speaking about someone else.
We may feel that, in some cases, forgiving someone and not
feeling hatred at the thought of them, is too much—that only an
atma-jnani is capable of such a thing. However, remember, our
mind requires at least a relative amount of all of these qualities
in order even to be fit for self-knowledge. As is said in Kaâha
Upanishad:
nàvirato duécaritànnàéànto nàsamàhitaã |
nàéànta-mànaso và’pi prajñànenainam-àpnuyàt ||
One who has not desisted from bad conduct, whose senses
are uncontrolled, whose mind lacks concentration, whose
mind is unpeaceful, cannot attain this [the self] through
knowledge.2
1 àkruçâaã abhihito và avikriya eva àste.
2 Kaâha Upanishad, 1.2.24
79
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
The fact is, even without self-knowledge, we are capable of
tremendous amounts of patience and forgiveness. If we have
mentally tuned with Amma and her teachings, we can invoke
these higher aspects of ourselves. In reality, the person who has
insulted or abused us loses nothing by our bitter feelings. On
the other hand, since hatred and revenge are by nature agitating
thought patterns, we ourselves lose out on peace of mind. By
holding on to such feelings, we are only harming ourselves, or
from another angle, we are allowing that person to continue to
harm us. Amma says this phenomenon is common amongst
divorcees. She says that many people who have undergone divorce
tell her that, due to the betrayal and mean-spirited behavior
they suffered at the hands of their former spouse, they refuse
to forgive. Many have told Amma, “I can forgive anyone, but
don’t ask me to forgive him.” In such cases, Amma points out
how, even after the divorce, the individual’s mind is still ruled
by the former spouse. “Although we have been released from
one perceived jail, we remain behind the jail bars of our own
mental creation,” Amma says. “Forgiveness is the medicine that
heals the wounds of the heart. By forgiving others, we are not
doing them a favor; we are helping ourselves.” Viewed from this
perspective, letting go of bitter experiences and forgiving is clearly
in our own best interest. Furthermore, as the Kaâha Upanishad
mantra points out, if we want to have a mind capable of the
degree of inner observation and discernment required for truly
appreciating, assimilating and remaining steadfast in spiritual
knowledge, then we absolutely must let such things go.
The following incident, which was shared with me by the
brahmacàrì involved, illustrates the extent to which forgiveness
is possible—even for one who has yet to understand his oneness
with all of creation. It took place in the mid-1990s. Back then,
every Saturday in Amritapuri was a day of fasting. Except for
80
Amritashtakam
those whose health problems precluded it, all of the Asram
residents would fast on Saturdays until around 9:00 p.m., when
Amma would come to the roof of the temple and serve everyone
pudding as prasàdam. One such evening, this brahmacàrì, who
was relatively new at the time, was sitting at Amma’s side. As he
explained to me later, he was not very used to fasting and was
extremely hungry. He had already received his share of pudding,
but in the Asram one doesn’t just eat upon receiving his food. He
will wait for everyone else to receive their share, then wait for the
unison chanting of the 15th chapter of the Bhagavad-Gita, then
wait for Amma to have a bite. Only then will one eat. While all
this was going on, this brahmacàrì was secretly praying for only
one thing: “Let them serve fast and chant fast!” Finally, all the
serving and chanting was complete, but instead of taking a bite
Amma turned to this brahmacàrì and said, “I think the orphans
from Parippalli 1
 just arrived. Bring them here.” A little irritated,
this brahmacàrì went downstairs, found the 100 or so orphans
who had just arrived and brought them back up to the roof of
the temple. Of course, Amma wanted to distribute pudding to
all of them as well. However, it turned out that there wasn’t
enough. So, Amma asked all the brahmacàrìs and brahmacàriåìs
to give back one scoop of their pudding. This brahmacàrì couldn’t
believe it. Worse yet, when the person came to him to take the
pudding from his plate, he took two scoops, not one. Seeing
this, he thought to himself: “Amma, this isn’t fair. I’m sure these
children had a nice breakfast, a nice lunch and a nice dinner
just an hour or so ago. I’ve been fasting and doing seva all day.”
Just as he was thinking like this, a little girl came up to Amma
for her share, and Amma gave her not one but two scoops. The
brahmacàrì told me that, at this point, he was almost angry with
Amma. At that very moment, Amma turned to him and said,
1 Amma’s orphanage, located in Kollam District, Kerala
81
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
“Just because you’re sitting next to me, don’t think you are close
to me.” Amma pointed to one of the little girl’s eyes. It was
milked over and obviously blind. Amma said, “Do you know
how that happened? Before we took her into the orphanage, her
father came home drunk one night and put his cigarette out in
her eye.” Tears formed in Amma’s eyes, but she quickly wiped
them away with the edge of her hand. She continued, “When
she first came for darsan, Amma asked her what had happened.
Do you know what she said after telling me? She said, ‘Amma,
please promise me you will not punish my father. He was drunk
at the time and didn’t know what he was doing.’” Amma looked
hard at the brahmacàrì and repeated, “So, don’t think you are
close to me just because you are sitting by my side.”
This story illustrates two important principles. First, it
provides us with a good example of Amma giving a disciple
some “tuition.” Seeing the brahmacàrì’s lack of compassion for
the orphans as a drawback of her own and knowing that the time
was ripe to draw his attention to it, Amma did so. Her words
may have been cutting and serious, but this was only a tool to
help drive home her point. Inside, Amma definitely remained
peaceful. As Amma says, “The anger of a mahatma is like a burnt
rope. It looks just like a real rope, but if you touch it, you will
see that nothing is really there.” In fact, since the brahmacàrì
took Amma’s scolding with the right attitude, it was a moment of
tremendous grace for him, helping to draw him out of the petty
world of his own personal concerns and into a more expansive
world of compassion. Secondly, the incident illustrates the level
of forgiveness we should be striving to cultivate. Moreover,
remember, this is not the forgiveness of an atma-jnani, but simply
that of a child who had somehow imbibed the value as a part of
her regular outlook on life.
82
Amritashtakam
If we have truly understood the teachings regarding our
true self, we should strive to assimilate this quality as a natural
extension of that understanding. This means, each time we are
insulted and feel a negative reaction arising, we should reflect
on who we truly are in a spiritual sense and dissolve the power
of that arising thought through discernment. If we can reflect
in this manner when such situations arise, not only can we nip
such ignorance-steeped thoughts in the bud, we can also gradually
reduce our tendency to react in the first place. This process takes
time and dedicated effort, but gradually it has its effect.
Here, a doubt may arise: Since forgiveness in its full glory
can only be a product of atma-jnanam, how can we develop this
value to the extent required to attain that self-knowledge? There
are a number of methods for cultivating forgiveness. One, we
have discussed: Not having expectations. Amma says that we
should realize that all worldly love has some degree of selfishness
in it. When we understand this, we will stop expecting others
to behave like saints and we will be much more accepting and
patient when they commit selfish, egocentric actions. Another
method is to have faith in the law of karma, which states that
every single experience we undergo—be it at the hands of Nature
or at the hands of other people—is, in fact, the fruit of an action
that we have performed either earlier in this life or in a past life.
When we can reflect, upon being insulted, that the insult was
the karmic fruit of, perhaps, our having insulted someone else
in the past, it is easier to let go of feelings of hatred and revenge
because to take revenge would only perpetuate the cycle. We
can also simply look at the lives of other saints and sages and
see how they were able to forgive. This will inspire us to do so
as well. In these and other ways, we can go a long way toward
cultivating patience and forgiveness.
83
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
In the case of the little girl forgiving her father, it’s impossible
to say the exact source of her capacity for forgiveness. Regardless
of how she attained the capacity to forgive him, the important
thing is to see that forgiveness is possible and that we have to
put in effort to cultivate it if we want to imbibe true spirituality.
Before concluding, I would like to make one more important
point. Just because Sri Sankara says that the atma-jnani is
unperturbed even when hit or insulted doesn’t mean that we
should not stand up for ourselves and for others. If people
are physically harming us, we should react—if only just to run
away. What is important is that mentally we are unaffected.
Even if we have to battle it out externally, within we should
remain peaceful and devoid of hate. For non-sannyàsìs who are
transacting in the world, it is incorrect to allow others to walk
all over you. As Amma always says, “If someone comes in the
room with a machinegun, we cannot just sit there, saying, ‘Nonviolence is the ultimate dharma.’ We must react. If we fail to
react, instead of just one or two people being injured, dozens
may be injured. Then our non-reaction itself has in fact become
a form of violence.” Furthermore, until we have cultivated the
spiritual maturity to accept the aggression of others toward us
as Amma has, we should continue to respond, making sure we
do so through righteous means.
In general in spiritual life, we need to know and accept our
own level. Otherwise, we can end up like the egg that imitated
the orange. (“One day before breakfast, an orange rolled off the
counter and escaped its fate. Filled with hope, the egg followed.”)
I remember a few years ago, Amma was talking with someone
who was undergoing a lot of personal problems, including that
various people he cared about were spreading lies about him and
trying to bring lawsuits against him. As part of her advice to
him, Amma explained that, during certain astrological periods
84
Amritashtakam
in an individual’s life, no matter what the affected person does,
it will be taken in the wrong way. She said that during such
periods one should try to perform good deeds. Even though
these also may be taken in the wrong way, they will lessen the
affects of the previous bad actions. The man nodded and said,
“I understand. I should start doing more loving acts in the
world.” Amma softly said, “Yes.” Then the man said, “So, the
best defense is no defense.” To which Amma said, “No. I can
follow that path because I can accept anything that comes, but
you are not at that level. So, you must also stand up for yourself
and deal with the situation.”
85
One Who Is Ever Content
SATATAË SAËTUÇÂAÃ
The next quality mentioned by Sri Krishna is satataë saëtuçâaã.
Satataë means always; saëtuçâaã means one who is perfectly
content, perfectly satisfied, one who has no feeling of lacking or
wanting, one who feels ever complete. Krishna has already explained
the cause of the parabhakta’s contentment in the Gita’s second
chapter as coming directly from his own self: “Content in the
self by the self alone.”1
For most of us, the idea of being permanently self-content
is hard to even conceive because our personal experiences of
contentment have always come in the wake of the fulfillment of
various desires: obtaining a job, eating a delicious meal, winning
the love of our dream partner, having our adult children spend
the holidays with us, etc. However, the contentment of an atma-jnani is not based on the attainment of such things; it is founded
in the self.
According to Vedànta, a desire is nothing but a repetitive
thought wave—be it gross and acute or subtle and obtuse—fixating
our mind upon a certain attainment. These desires are based
upon past impressions formed in our psyche associated with
similar situations. For example, we feel lonely. The last time we
felt lonely, we called our friend and we felt better. Thus, now,
the very feeling of loneliness triggers the desire to call our friend,
and we decide to act upon it. However, when we call him, his
number is busy. The pressure of the thought waves pushing us
to fulfill the desire builds. We try again; again the number is
busy. “Who is he talking to? When is he going to get off the
phone? I need to speak to him now!” The desire intensifies.
1 Bhagavad-Gita, 2.55: àtmanyevàtmanatuçâaã
86
Amritashtakam
The mind becomes even more turbulent with that desire. We
try again, and he finally answers. The desire is filled, and the
turbulence in the mind is quelled instantly. That is, the desire
thought waves clouding the mirror of the mind are eradicated,
and we experience the contentment that is, in reality, a mental
reflection of our own true nature. This is how contentment based
on fulfilling one’s desires works.
Unfortunately, such contentment can never be “constant.” It
lasts only until the next desire arises. For most of us, this is only
a matter of a few minutes. Furthermore, we have only deepened
the furrow in our psyche that associates calling a friend with
the relief of loneliness. The deeper the furrow, the more intense
the desire. The more intense the desire, the greater the mental
turbulence. The greater the mental turbulence, the more disturbed
our peace. Worse yet, our friend is not always going to be there
to pick up the phone. Therefore, if our peace and contentment
depend on that condition, eventually we are going to suffer.
The atma-jnani knows that bliss is the nature of the self.
He understands that any happiness anyone seems to experience
through objects, relationships, situations, etc, is only that
individual’s true nature shining forth. He also knows that desire
itself creates the mental conditions that obstruct one’s true nature
from reflecting in the mind. With this knowledge, he refuses to
play the mind’s game. This allows him to bathe in the source
of bliss—himself—rather than going through the troublesome,
unreliable middleman of desire-fulfillment.
In Vedànta, we often hear the expression saccidànanda atma:
the self that is sat, cit and ànanda—existence, consciousness, bliss.
With a little study and reflection, we can soon understand that
we are always existent and conscious. However, the bliss aspect
creates confusion because, although sometimes we feel blissful,
we do not always feel that way. Here, it is helpful to understand
87
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
that every instance of happiness, or bliss, that we experience—be
it in deep sleep, in meditation or in day-to-day life—is the result
of the creation of a mental condition that is congruous with
the expression of our true self. Conversely, every experience of
sorrow, frustration, anger, etc, is the result of the creation of a
mental condition incongruous with the expression of our true
self. However, regardless of our temporary mental conditions, the
substratum of saccidànanda remains constant. We can explain
this phenomenon with the example of various atmospheric
conditions. On a sunny day, the sun is clearly experienced. On
a cloudy day, although the sun is still there, it will barely be felt.
The mind is akin to the atmosphere. Certain conditions allow
the bliss of the self to shine within it; certain conditions do not.
Regardless, the bliss remains, and the reflection points to the
existence of the original.
Perfect constant contentment is only possible through
understanding our true nature because only the atma is eternal. If
our contentment is based on any other entity in the universe—be it
a person, place, thing, attainment, relationship, etc—its foundation
will be unsound. Then it is not a question of if our contentment
will go, only a question of when. If it came as an event in time,
it will go as an event in time. While perfect contentment only
comes through self-knowledge, we can attain a relative amount
of contentment through karma yoga 1
 and through reflecting
on the transient nature of all things other than the atma. The
majority of people have yet to understand that only the atma is
eternal. However, as spiritual seekers, we must begin to internalize
this understanding. Until we do so, our mind will always be
turning outward in hopes of finding contentment in the objects
of the external world. Someone once showed me a scene from
1 For an explanation of karma yoga, refer to the chapter on sama sukhaduãkhaã.
88
Amritashtakam
a film called Dumb & Dumber (1994) that illustrates this truth.
Throughout the comedy, the protagonist has been desperately
pursuing a woman who is not interested in him. Unable to read
her obvious signals, he begs her to level with him and tell him
his chances of winning her heart. She tells him, “Not good.” He
responds, “You mean, not good like ‘one out of a hundred’?”
She responds, “I’d say, more like one out of a million.” The
man celebrates, saying, “So, you’re telling me there’s a chance!”
Until we are convinced that true contentment is only possible
in and through the self, we will continue to search for it in the
material world.
And let’s say that somehow we were able to conjure a desired
object that was miraculously eternal. What would happen?
Of course, we would eventually grow tired of it. Isn’t that our
experience? Everything in this world leaves us wanting. So
many of the things we’ve wanted in life, we’ve already attained:
jobs, relationships, possessions, homes, children, grandchildren,
success... But are we content? For most of us, there is still that
feeling of lacking. Vedànta boldly tells us that the things of this
world will never take away that feeling.
As said, if we want to attain contentment, we have to spend
time reflecting on these truths—that nothing we have is eternal
and that nothing we attain will give us perfect contentment.
Each time, a desire rises in our mind, we should reflect like this,
bringing these truths back to our mind. We need not become a
sannyàsì, with no possessions or professional ambitions, but when
we obtain something or strive to obtain something, we should
be very clear regarding that thing’s impermanent nature and its
inability to make us eternally content. As a Sanskrit saying goes:
arthànàm arjane duãkham arjitànàë ca rakçaåe |
àye duãkhaë vyaye duãkhaë dhig-arthàã kaçâa-saëérayàã ||
89
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
Acquisition of wealth is painful, so too the effort to protect
wealth. Pain in gain, pain in loss—Alas! Wealth is home
to hardship.
The practice of reminding ourselves of these truths cultivates
vairàgyam—detachment from the objects of the world. Without
detachment, our mind will never really be available to us for
serious spiritual pursuit. It will constantly be nagging us to obtain
some object or the other. It won’t let us spend time focused
on our spiritual studies or practices. In fact, the opposite of
contentment is greed, and an individual who has fallen prey to
greed can never hope to realize the self. Why? Because greed
itself—irrespective of its focus—has as its cause the misconception
that contentment can be attained through amassing more. Greed
believes happiness is attainable through the material.
The detached mind quickly rejects such erroneous thoughts.
If worldly desires arise in such a mind, they are nipped in the
bud by its discrimination. Thus, the detached mind shuts down
the desires and thought patterns that are inconducive to the
spiritual goal or incongruous with self-knowledge, thus helping
us to live a spiritual life.
In fact, even after we have understood the spiritual teachings
regarding the atma, this practice of reminding ourselves of the
impermanence of any happiness that is not founded directly on
the atma has to continue. For Vedantic meditation is based on
two truths: brahma satyam and jaganmithyà. Literally, this means
“brahman is real” and “the universe is an illusion.” 1
 However,
we should expand the meaning to bear out an important point:
1 Although mithyà literally means “illusion,” Vedànta explains this does not
mean unreal in the sense of something that does not exist. Rather it means
unreal in the sense that its reality is temporary and depends completely upon
its non-temporary substratum, like rope that appears to be a snake or a post
that appears to be a ghost.
90
Amritashtakam
“The happiness that comes directly from brahman [atma] alone is
real and permanent; the happiness that comes from the objects
of the world is temporary.” Thus, in Vedantic meditation, we
can meditate on either side of this coin. We can meditate on the
self, affirming it as the true eternal blissful reality of who we are.
Or we can meditate on the world, reminding ourselves that the
happiness we seem to derive from its objects is temporary and
really not coming from the objects at all but from within us.
For us, it may be difficult to conceive of being satataë
saëtuçâaã—ever perfectly content—but for someone like Amma
who has assimilated the Vedantic wisdom, it is the constant
experience. Amma’s contentment requires nothing external
whatsoever.
91
One Whose Mind Is
Concentrated
YOGÌ
A lot of confusion surrounds the term yogì. The main reason for
this confusion is that the word has different meanings depending
on its context. It comes from the Sanskrit root yuj, which has a
number of meanings, including to join, to unite. Thus, in the
scriptures, the term yogì can refer to a person “joined” in any
spiritual practice—karma yoga, meditation, jñàna yoga, etc. It can
also mean a self-realized individual who has “joined” his jìvatma
[individual soul] with the paramatma [supreme soul] through the
knowledge that they were always one and the same. However, the
primary meaning of yuj is to concentrate the mind, and that is
how Sri Sankara takes it here, defining a yogì as a person with
a concentrated mind—samàhita-cittaã.
The atma-jnani’s powers of concentration and mental control
are unparalleled. When Amma decides to focus on something,
nothing can deter her. I remember once, during the meditation
part of a program of Amma’s in Tokyo, everything suddenly
began to vibrate with the tremors of an earthquake. Everyone,
myself included, opened their eyes and looked around—only
to see Amma sitting with eyes still peacefully closed, rapt in
meditation. If Amma makes a resolve to meditate for a specific
period of time, nothing can disturb her. In the same vein, when
Amma is dealing with a serious issue—for example, relief work in
the wake of a natural disaster—she also has the concentration to
see that work through until the end without getting sidetracked.
Her mental control is flawless.
92
Amritashtakam
I am reminded of the old days, when myself and the other
now-sannyàsì disciples of Amma were first coming to see her.
As I’ve mentioned, back then we did not know much about
spirituality. We were primarily interested in experiencing Amma’s
motherly compassion. We enjoyed talking with her and joking
with her, but of course Amma had other plans—specifically to
prod us forward along the spiritual path. So, after conversing
with us for a while Amma would usually sit in meditation in
hopes that by seeing her example we would spend some time
refining our minds through this discipline. The problem was that
Amma’s capacity for meditative concentration and our capacity
were light years apart. After 20 or 30 minutes, our eyes would
open and we would want to resume the talking and joking. To
our chagrin, Amma would not open her eyes when we would.
Like a good athletic coach who is always pushing his trainees to
run further or jump higher, Amma wanted us to try to meditate
for longer and longer, to strengthen our power of concentration
and mental control. The only way she could push us was to
refuse to open her eyes.
The ability to focus is essential for a successful pursuit of
Vedànta. In order to study the scriptures and words of the guru,
we must be able to sit with focus and concentration. Our mind
cannot drift this way and that. We cannot be like the disciple
Amma sometimes jokes about who, instead of listening to his
guru, began watching a mouse crawl around a hole in the wall.
Then, when the guru asked him if the teaching had “gone
in” yet, he replied, “Not completely. Its tail is still out.” Thus,
concentration is required for the fundamental Vedantic spiritual
practice of éravaåam—listening to the Vedantic teachings. Just
as it is required for listening, it is also required for mananam—
reflecting upon the teachings and identifying and clearing
our doubts. Furthermore, once our Vedantic understanding is
93
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
doubt-free, concentration is also required for nididhyàsanam—
the practice of dwelling in that knowledge and systematically
removing the habitual actions, words and thoughts that run
contrary to it.
It is through this third practice that our self-knowledge
becomes firm. Sri Krishna calls this the conversion of mere prajñà
[knowledge] into sthitaprajñaã—fixed, steadfast, firmly entrenched
and assimilated knowledge.1
 Only when our knowledge becomes
steady can we truly be said to be an atma-jnani in the ultimate
sense of the term. Moreover, only when our knowledge is
firmly established via nididhyàsanam will we gain the degree of
concentrative power that we observe in someone like Amma.
This is because Amma’s power of concentration is not only born
through spiritual practices like meditation; it is also born from
her heartfelt understanding that the self is the sole source of
fulfillment and that everything other than pure consciousness is
ephemeral. Ultimately this understanding is what will make our
power of concentration complete because when we grasp “I am
bliss,” etc, as a living truth, it strips the various enticing objects
of the world of their power to draw our attention without our
permission. Thus Vedantic assimilation and concentration go
hand in hand—each one fuels the other until we find that mental
discipline is no longer a discipline but our natural, spontaneous
mode of functioning. Ultimately, here in the Amritashtakam,
Krishna is speaking about an atma-jnani. Therefore, when he says
yogì, he not only means that this individual has concentration
of mind in a general sense, but that he never loses awareness of
the Vedantic truth he has learned regarding his true nature and
the true nature of the world in which he transacts.
Meditation, chanting one’s mantra, chanting stotrams like
the Lalità Sahasranàma, etc, are all means to cultivate our
1 Gita, 2.61
94
Amritashtakam
power of concentration. If the practice involves focus, the mind’s
capacity to focus will increase. As Amma says, “Whatever form
of meditation we do, whether we focus on the heart or between
the eyebrows, the goal is the same—one-pointed concentration.”
Thus, such spiritual practices can and should be practiced from
the very outset of spiritual life. Just as a daily regimen of lifting
weights strengthens the physical body, so too a daily regimen of
focused meditation strengthens the mind. The less subtle the
object of our meditation, the less difficult it will be to focus on
that object. Thus, singing bhajans with concentration, chanting
mantras, meditating on God with form, etc, are all prescribed.
Once we have understood Vedànta fully, our meditation is no
longer upon any object, regardless of how subtle the form may
be, but upon ourselves—meditation upon the meditator. This
is not easy. It cannot be done in the beginning. In order to
engage in Vedantic meditation, one must first have studied and
attained a doubt-free understanding of Vedànta and also gained
the mental strength required to focus on such a subtle principle.
Thus non-Vedantic forms such as those mentioned above are an
essential foundation.
95
One Who Is Self-controlled
YATÀTMÀ
The next quality is yatatma—one who has controlled his own
nature.1
 Before coming to Vedànta, as well as during its study
and assimilation, the atma-jnani put in intense effort to discipline
his mind. When unhealthy thoughts and negative thinking
would arise, he would quickly discern that these thoughts were
harmful and terminate them. Similar was his discipline regarding
sense objects. He would avoid people, objects and situations that
were counterproductive to his spiritual goal—objects that, for
example, seemed to reinforce the misconception that happiness is
rooted in the experience of external phenomena. Thus, through
steadfastness in these two disciplines—known in the scriptures
as éamaã and damaã [mental and sense control], respectively—by
the time one has attained self-knowledge, mental and sensory
discipline have become a spontaneous, natural part of his
personality. Moreover, his disciplined nature is then bolstered
by his Vedantic understanding. Seeing the essential oneness
of himself, God and the universe, he is no longer prone to the
negative thinking and sense-oriented desires that arise from the
perception of duality. Thus, through his knowledge and his
disciplined nature, he has become ever in control of his thoughts,
words and actions.
The more one assimilates atma-jnanam, the more
spontaneous and natural self-control becomes. At the same time,
the more mentally and sensually disciplined one becomes, the
easier it becomes to assimilate self-knowledge. Therefore, mental
and sensory discipline are essential for all spiritual seekers. Éama
is founded on the principle that although we do not have control
1 Sri Sankara’s gloss: saëyata-svabhàvaã
96
Amritashtakam
over the thoughts that pop into our head, we do have control
over whether we entertain those thoughts or not. If we want a
mind that is psychologically healthy enough to gain and retain
true understanding of our real nature, this thorough weeding
out of potentially harmful thoughts is essential. All harmful and
negative thinking should be nipped in the bud. Through such
effort, we can gradually transform our thinking patterns.
Sometimes when discussing the phenomenon of how such
discipline can transform our nature, Amma will give the example
of Tumban, a street dog that sometimes sleeps in her room. When
he first began staying there, Amma would promptly send him
out as soon as the 4:00 a.m. bell rang for the morning arcana.
After a month or so, Amma says she no longer had to send him
out at this time. A few minutes before the bell would strike, he
would be waiting at the door, ready to scamper down the steps
into the prayer hall. Actions beccome habit, and habits become
our nature.
Thought regulation is a vital spiritual practice. It is not
only requisite prior to coming to Vedànta, but it also must be
maintained during the process of studying and assimilating
Vedànta. In fact, in the second chapter of the Gita, Krishna stresses
the importance of maintaining mental and sensory discipline,
saying that they are essential auxiliary practices even for one who
has intellectually understood Vedànta and is now doing Vedantic
meditation as his primary spiritual practice. Thus Krishna makes
it very clear that performing quality control with regard to our
thoughts, etc, is not only for spiritual beginners. On the contrary,
Krishna is prescribing this discipline even for advanced Vedantic
students. Krishna strongly stresses that if one fails to adhere to
thought discipline in particular, a spiritual fall is bound to occur:
dhyàyato viçayàn-puësaã saêgasteçùpajàyate |
saêgàt sañjàyate kàmaã kàmàt-krodho’bhijàyate ||
97
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
krodhàd-bhavati saëmohaã saëmohàt-smäti-vibhramaã |
smäti-bhraëéàd-buddhi-nàéo buddhi-nàéàt-praåaéyati ||
For the man who mentally dwells on objects, fondness
for them arises. From fondness, desire [to attain them] is
born. From [thwarted] desire, anger is born. From anger,
comes delusion [with regard to what is dharma and what
is adharma]; from that delusion comes the [temporary]
inability to remember [the spiritual teachings one has
learned]; [with repeated occurrences] from that [temporary]
inability to remember comes the [permanent] destruction
of that capacity. From that destruction, one’s [spiritual] life
is destroyed.1
Here we see how important mental discipline is. Once we truly
attain the goal, like Amma, effort to control our thoughts will
no longer be required; to think quality thoughts becomes the
mind’s very nature. Until it becomes spontaneous, we must
put in constant effort in this direction. In his commentary, Sri
Sankara takes time to point out that if mental discipline is not
maintained and one begins ruminating on the various objects
and relationships of the world as true and permanent sources
of happiness, then eventually the delusion will grow to such an
extent that “One may even abuse his guru.” 2
As important as it is to maintain rigorous awareness,
discernment and censorship with regards to one’s thoughts, one
should remember that prior to full assimilation of self-knowledge
one can never rid himself of the impulse to view sense objects
as a source of happiness. This is also something Krishna specifies
in the Gita:
1 Gita, 2.62–2.63; these verses have been translated in keeping with Sri
Sankara’s commentary.
2 gurum api àkroéati
98
Amritashtakam
viçayà vinivartante niràhàrasya dehinaã |
rasa-varjaë rasopyasya paraë däçâvà nivartate ||
The objects themselves leave the man who doesn’t indulge
in them, but attachment to their taste remains. Even that
taste-attachment turns away from him once he has seen
the Supreme.1
Here, Krishna is saying that, as a spiritual aspirant, even if you
avoid indulging in sense objects—dama—don’t think that you will
stop feeling cravings for them. The cravings will continue to some
extent, popping up in your mind as impulses from time to time.
They will only go once you have fully assimilated and constantly
abide in atma-jnanam. Until then, you have to disempower such
thoughts continually through discernment.
Why is it that only after atma-jnanam becomes firmly
assimilated do impulse cravings for sense objects dissolve
completely? In his commentary, Sri Sankara says it is because once
we abide steadily in the truth “I am the supreme brahman,” all of
our ongoing sense perceptions become nirbìjam—seedless. Until
then, all of our sensory experiences are constantly registering
impressions of either like or dislike. These impressions are
stored like seeds in the inner recesses of our mind. When those
objects are re-experienced, either through the senses or through
memory, those like-and-dislike seeds germinate and the feeling of
attraction or aversion arises along with the sensory experience.
However, one who firmly abides in self-knowledge has severed
the connection between objects and happiness and sorrow. He
knows that happiness has only one true source—himself, the
ever-present atma. So, when he experiences the objects of the
world, he experiences them as they are, without judging them
as attractive or unattractive. Thus, his experience of the world is
1 Gita, 2.59
99
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
unsullied by prejudice. As Amma says, “He sees God’s creation;
not his own creation.” Viewing creation and experiences thus
produces no such seeds.
In this context, we should explore one more important
aspect of the atma-jnani. On one hand, his mind has been
refined—both through his preparatory spiritual practices such as
mental discipline and karma yoga, as well as through his spiritual
understanding regarding his true identity. On the other hand,
his understanding regarding his true nature is, of course, that he
is not the body and mind but the ever-liberated atma. He knows
that, at best, his true nature serves as the witness to the mind
and all its various thoughts, convictions, ideas and emotions,
etc. Thus, even though he enjoys a peaceful mind, he knows
he is not the mind. This is an important distinction to make
because constant mental peace is impossible. The mind is part
of the universe—a mixture of energy and subtle matter—and as
such it will have fluctuations. We can refine it, of course, but
there is no such thing as constant perfect peace at the mental
level. Mahatmas like Amma have refined their minds to such an
extreme extent that we cannot even recognize these fluctuations,
but from the perspective of the mahatma, they will be noticed—
tiredness will come, a sense of urgency with regard to helping
others will come, etc—but the mahatma knows, regardless of the
state of the mind, that he is not the mind; he is the eternally
peaceful atma. Thus, while we should never stop disciplining
our mind, at a certain point, we also need to start reminding
ourselves that ultimate peace is our eternal nature and not
something to be attained on the mental level: “I am the everblissful atma despite fluctuations of the mind.” This is a step that
requires maturity and understanding. If not, we risk becoming
like the Vedàntins Amma frequently pokes fun at—people who
100
Amritashtakam
say, “I am brahman,” but become angry when tea or food is not
brought to them on time.
It is this detachment from the mind and its fluctuations
that, in fact, allows for the greatness of mahatmas like Amma.
For, it is this detachment that creates Amma’s capacity to allow
her mind to identify with the pain and joy of others, while at
the same time remaining totally detached. I remember one time,
many years ago, a young man was speaking with Amma. As he
was telling Amma his sad story, he began to cry, and as he did so,
Amma began to cry as well. Soon the young man was sobbing,
and Amma was sobbing also. The look of pain in the boy’s face
and in Amma’s face were almost identical. Seeing Amma weep
like this, I thought something terrible had happened and rushed
near. Seeing Amma crying, I also started to become upset.
Seeing me standing there over the young man’s shoulder, Amma
suddenly looked at me and—with a totally sober expression—sort
of winked, as if to tell me that everything was really okay. (I later
learned that he was upset because he felt Amma had not been
paying him much attention lately.) Now, the obvious question
comes: Was Amma faking? You cannot fake tears like that. You
cannot fake that depth of emotion. I am 100-percent positive
that Amma’s mind was totally identified with the young man’s
viewpoint and sorrow. However, at the same time, Amma was
not identified with her mind. Thus, when interacting with me,
Amma was able to switch gears instantaneously—communicate
with me—and switch back again. Countless are the examples of
this. It isn’t only with people’s sorrow. Just as often, Amma does
the same thing with another’s joy. Here, the important thing to
understand is that, in her supreme identification with the self,
Amma allows her mind to identify with the joy and sorrow of
others and yet remains totally detached. This is the ultimate
fruit of steadfastness in self-knowledge. At the same time, for
101
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
Amma—who has come to this world to play the role of the Divine
Mother—it is a job requirement! How else could Amma be in the
present moment with each individual who comes to her, sharing
sorrows one moment, worry the next, excitement thereafter, then
joy, then sorrow again? How else would everyone be able to see
and experience Amma’s total understanding of their mental
state and gain strength and courage from that understanding? If
Amma were identified with her mind, it would not be possible.
As Amma says, “The boat must be in the water, but the water
should not be in the boat.”
102
One Who Is of Firm Conviction
DÄÁHA-NIÉCAYAÃ
In fact, Advaita Vedànta is not the only school of Indian spiritual
thought, but one of several. While today it is the most prevalent,
others still exist. Even within Vedànta, we have not only one
theology but several variations—the main three being: Advaita
Vedànta, Viéiçâha Advaita Vedànta and Dvaita Vedànta. 1
 Then
there are less-commonly practiced schools of Indian thought
as well. 2
 In fact, all of these schools accept the Vedas as a
pramàåam—a valid source of knowledge. 3
 That said, they have
all come to different conclusions regarding the Vedic teaching.
Added to these are the Pùrva Mìmàësakas, who believe that the
main point of the Vedas is to instruct us to perform rituals in
order to go to heaven after we die. Just as the Advaita Vedàntin’s
do, the Pùrva Mìmàësakas also believe that heaven is ephemeral,
but not believing in self-realization, they see temporary sojourns
to heaven to be the best deal the universe has to offer. Thus,
they advise us to strive throughout our lives to attain as much
1 Advaita Vedànta, consolidated by Adi Sankaracàrya, explains the essence
of Vedànta to be a teaching of non-duality, wherein the world and God are
understood not to exist as separate entities from their foundation, the atma;
Viéiçâha Advaita, consolidated by Ràmànuja Àcàrya, explains a qualified nonduality; and Dvaita, consolidated by Madhvàcàrya, teaches duality. Each of
these three Vedànta systems stresses different statements of the Vedas as being
of primary importance, thus bringing out a different import. The primary
preceptors of each tradition have written commentaries on the Upanishads,
Bhagavad-Gita and Brahma Sùtras.
2 Yoga Daréanam, Sàêkhya Daréanam, Nyàya Daréanam and Vaiéeçika
Daréanam
3 All six schools accept the Vedas as a valid source of knowledge. However,
only Vedànta and Pùrva Mìmàësa view the Vedas as the primary source of
knowledge and logic as subsidiary. The other four see logic as primary.
103
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
puåyam [merit] as possible, so that when we die we can spend a
few million years in one of the heavenly abodes.
Aside from these six schools, there are six schools of Indian
thought that, at least in their canonical doctrines, reject the
teachings of the Vedas. One of these is called Càrvàka Daréanam,
which boldly proclaims that the only reality is the temporary
experiences of the physical body and, therefore, we should base
our lives on attaining the maximum amount of pleasure possible.
In Adi Sankaracàrya’s time, there was a lot of debate taking
place between these various schools of thought. In fact, one of
the reasons why Sri Sankara deserves so much reverence and
gratitude is that through his commentaries he pointed out the
logical fallacies and scriptural contradictions in the other Indian
schools of thought and established the supremacy of Advaita as
the ultimate teaching of the Vedas.
When we study Sri Sankara’s commentaries, we see that they
are presented in the form of debates with hypothetical proponents
of the other schools. These pùrvapakçìs [people of opposing views]
present challenges to Sri Sankara’s explanations on the various
verses of the scriptures, and Sri Sankara responds, quelling their
doubts and poking holes in their counter explanations as well.
These debates were not entirely hypothetical. During his short
life, Sri Sankara travelled the length and breadth of India and
successfully debated renowned scholars of the other schools of
thought. In fact, Sri Sankara gained one of his most ardent disciples
in this manner because when he debated the reigning champion of
Pùrva Mìmàësa—a scholar named Maåáana Miéra—he not only
defeated him but also inspired him to become his student. Taking
sannyàsa and changing his name to Sureévaràcàrya, Maåáana
Miéra then proceeded to write a number of important post-Sankara
commentaries on the scriptures as well as some original Advaitic
treatises, all of which are still studied today.
104
Amritashtakam
The reason for explaining all of this is because the next
quality listed by Sri Krishna, däáha-niécayaã, means “one of firm
conviction.” In his commentary, Sri Sankara specifies that firm
conviction must be there with regard to the àtma-tattvas—the
principles regarding the self. As people who have attained some
degree of spiritual understanding, we may think that we have
solid knowledge regarding who we are, but the debates found in
Sri Sankara’s commentaries stand as testaments to the fact that
there is a lot of room for confusion on the subject of the self.
Is the atma the performer of actions? Is it an experiencer of the
fruits of actions? What role does karma play in self-realization?
Is there only one atma or multiple atmas? Is the mind the
foundation of the atma, or is the atma the foundation of the
mind? Is the atma eternal? If so, what is the proof? Do I have
to do something to become the atma or am I already the atma?
Is there a difference between the bliss of the atma and the bliss
I experience in day-to-day life? If so, what? What is meant when
it is said that the jìvatma [the individual self] is one with the
paramatma [the supreme self]? Is the atma all-pervading? Is my
atma the same as the atma of others? What is meant when we
say the world is unreal? Can we experience the atma and if so
how? With the quality “firm conviction,” Krishna is saying that
the atma-jnani is crystal clear on all of these questions. He has
no confusion whatsoever about who he is and what he is not.
We see many Vedàntins that, to some extent, have
understood that the consciousness that pervades their own bodymind complex is their true nature. Rarer are those who have
truly understood that this consciousness is also the foundation
of the world they percieve around them. In essence, they are able
to see themselves as divine but are unable to extend that divinity
to rest of the world. This shows a lack of clarity, which must
be rectified. True clarity with regard to self-knowledge is rare.
105
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
If that knowledge is truly clear and assimilated, it will express
not only in our words, but also in our actions. Most of us know
the story of how Amma used to lick the wounds of Dattan, the
leper. I remember back then many of us used to tell Amma that
she should stop because leprosy was a serious disease, which she
could contract. Amma would never listen to us. I remember once,
I asked Amma if she wasn’t worried that she might fall sick like
Dattan? Amma very directly said, “Son, we are not the body.
We are the atma. Whatever is going to happen to the body will
happen. That doesn’t concern me. I am here to help others.”
Many people may quote Gita verses about the indestructability
of the self—such as, “Weapons do not cleave it, fire burns it not,
water wets it not, nor does the wind dry it” 1
—but how many of
them, like Amma, can stand firmly in that conviction in order
to uplift others?
Some of the doubts we find expressed by the opponents in Sri
Sankara’s commentaries we ourselves may have. Others we may
never even have considered. In some ways, “ignorance is bliss,”
but, in fact, in some situations, until we consider challenging
perspectives regarding our true nature and understand why they
are fallacious, our understanding will not be firm.
In fact, it is the guru’s duty gradually to ensure that the
understanding of his disciples is free of all doubts. In order
to bring about such firm knowledge, challenging views must
be presented to the disciple. This process is referred to in the
scriptures as sthùåànikhanana nyàya—the principle of digging
the post.2
 This axiom gets its name from an ancient technique
1 Gita, 2.23: nainaë chindanti éastràåi nainaë dahati pàvakaã | na cainaë
kledayantyàpo na éoçayati màrutaã ||
2 From Sri Sankara’s commentary on the Brahma Sùtras, 3.3.53: “...when
the statement of refutation comes after raising the doubt, it produces a firm
conviction about the subject matter presented, as per the ‘digging the post’
axiom.”
106
Amritashtakam
of construction, wherein once the foundation posts have been
planted, they all must be shaken again and again. In fact it is this
intentional shaking that makes them become firm. Only once a
post has been rendered firm through this process does it become
a fit foundation. Amma says that our understanding regarding
our true self must become as clear as our current knowledge
regarding our superficial identity. When we wake in the morning,
we don’t require a refresher to remember who we are, where we
live, if we are male or female, etc. Our understanding of our
true nature must become just as firm. Studying opposing views
and challenges and understanding why they are incorrect can
help us to this end.
This practice is not reserved only for atma-jnanam. It appears
in many other fields as well. Once a devotee of Amma’s had
an appointment with a senior doctor who teaches at the Mata
Amritanandamayi Math’s àyurveda college. In the examination
room, standing beside the doctor, was the doctor’s daughter,
who is following in his footsteps. After the devotee discussed his
medical problem, the doctor began suggesting some medicines
to his daughter. From his humble manner, one would have
thought he was the disciple and the daughter was the master. The
daughter nodded as her father listed off the various medicines,
but then when he suggested one medicine, the girl said “No, in
this situation, that can create constipation, which could further
exacerbate the problem.” With the same humility, her father softly
said, “Oh, right. Then what can we give instead?” To which the
girl suggested an alternative medicine. Doubting the doctor’s
knowledge, the devotee came to me and expressed his concern.
He said, “Swàmiji, I am a bit apprehensive about him. He didn’t
seem very confident when prescribing the medicine.” I laughed
and told him, “I know that doctor very well. He is one of the
most respected doctors in his field. He was feigning ignorance in
107
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
order to test his daughter and strengthen her knowledge.” What
a beautiful and systematic teacher-student tradition!
On many occasions I’ve seen Amma do exactly same
thing. In the Asram, at least a couple times a week Amma will
come to the seashore or main hall for question-and-answer. The
majority of time the devotees and disciples ask the questions,
and Amma provides the answers. Sometimes, it is Amma who
asks the questions and the devotees and disciples who must
answer. When this happens, Amma will sometimes really play
devil’s advocate, making various disciples stand up and clarify
their understanding.
“Firm conviction” comes at two levels. If we take the
threefold Vedantic spiritual practices of éravaåam, mananam and
nididhyàsanam, it is the mananam stage—wherein we remove our
doubts regarding self-knowledge—through which we develop the
first level. Here, any confusion or doubt or lack of clarity we had
after studying the scriptures is removed. This is level-one “firm
conviction.” Thereafter, we will likely continue to experience
thoughts and impulses that run counter to our Vedantic
knowledge. We need to put in effort to uproot them because
only when these contrary thoughts and emotions and habits are
eradicated will we experience the full fruit of our understanding.
This spiritual practice—nididhyàsanam—brings about level-two
“firm conviction.” Thus, Vedantic study and clearing our doubts
removes uncertainty at the level of the conscious mind, and
nididhyàsanam helps the knowledge to sink in and gradually
saturate the subconscious mind—the origin of thought itself.
The tangible mental peace that comes directly from eliminating
our negative tendencies should bolster our “firm conviction.” It
is like successful biofeedback, wherein our mental experience,
in its congruity with our intellectual understanding, makes us
stand even firmer in our understanding.
108
Amritashtakam
As stated in the Introduction, everything depends on our
understanding. Thus, firm conviction is essential. In fact, in
this regard, we can divide the spiritual journey into four steps.
The starting point is ignorance, wherein we only believe in the
physical aggregate of matter that is the body and brain. From
there, we come to have faith in the concept of soul, but have
no real understanding of what that is. Next, through éravaåam
and mananam, we attain clarity regarding the soul, learning
that it is our eternal true nature, etc. However, the journey is
not over. From there, through nididhyàsanam, we must entrench
ourselves in the Vedantic outlook, gradually uprooting the old
thought patterns based upon our old self-conception. Having
a clear understanding regarding our true nature is one thing;
never losing sight of that understanding or acting contrary to it
is another. Only then can we truly be said to have reached the
goal as Amma has.
109
One Whose Mind &
Intellect Are Fixed in Me
MAYYARPITA MANO-BUDDHIÃ
The next quality Sri Krishna mentions is mayi arpita manobuddhiã—“One whose mind and intellect are fixed in me.” Here,
we need to understand that when Krishna says “me,” he does not
mean that the parabhakta is constantly thinking of Krishna with
the bluish hue to his skin who plays the flute. When Krishna says
“me,” he does not mean his body and mind. Like the supreme
devotee that Krishna is describing, Krishna is also an atma-jnani.
Therefore, Krishna’s self-conception is not his body or mind but
the atma—the one and only self of all.
A few years back when Amma was giving darsan, a little girl
pushed her way up to the side of her chair. The girl told Amma
that she wanted to ask a question. Amma smiled and nodded
her head in encouragement. She then leaned way over to her
right so that the girl could speak directly into her ear. Everyone
watched as Amma listened intently, nodding her head each time
she registered one of the girl’s points. As soon as the little girl
finished, Amma told everyone, “She says her father says Amma
is Kàlì, but her mom says Amma is their mother. She wants to
know which one is right!” Amma laughed good-naturedly with
everyone, smiling at the girl’s innocence. She then gave the
girl a peck on the cheek and said, “Do you want to know who
Amma is?” The girl’s eyes widened, and she nodded, sort of in
awe. Amma told her, “If you want to know who Amma is, just
know who you are. Then you will know who Amma is.” It was
a wonderful moment—to the little girl and to anyone who was
willing to really listen, Amma was revealing that her ultimate
110
Amritashtakam
self-conception, her ultimate concept of “I,” is not her body-mind
complex or even a divine body-mind complex, but the atma.
Moreover, Amma was also revealing that the atma is not only
her true self, but the true self of us all.
A lot of religious conflict has arisen from followers who
impose their own limited self-conceptions upon their spiritual
leader. The mahatma’s concept of “I” is all-expansive. As already
stated by Krishna, he is totally devoid of the sense of “mine” and
of being a limited, isolated individual. However, many followers
of mahatmas have limited self-conceptions. Thus, when they hear
their spiritual master say “I,” they think he is using “I” in the
same manner they do—referring to the physical body, mind, name
and form. Unfortunately, history is riddled with instances when
disciples and devotees have pulled down their guru’s concept of
“I.” As Amma said in the address she delivered upon receiving
the James Parks Morton Interfaith Award in 2006, “Due to our
ignorance and limited perspective, we are confining mahatmas
within the tiny cages of religion. In their name, we have locked
ourselves inside the prison of the ego, and have proceeded to
inflate our egos and fight with one another.”
Words mean different things in different contexts, and
communication is impossible unless both people involved are
using the same definitions. This is why, traditionally, one of
the first Vedantic texts studied is a small treatise called Tattva
Bodhaã, wherein the basic lexicon of Advaita Vedànta is defined.1
The idea is that once a student has studied this text, he and
his teacher can freely use basic technical terms without either of
them having to worry that miscommunication is taking place.
1 Although commonly attributed to Adi Sankaracharya, it is probable that Tattva
Bodhaã was authored by a disciple of Vàsudevendra Sarasvatì, an àcàrya in the
Kàñcì Pìâham Sankaracharya guru-disciple lineage.
111
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
There is a joke that illustrates the importance of establishing
common definitions. One winter morning, a husband receives a
text from his wife: “Windows frozen. Won’t open.” The husband
texts back, “Pour hot water.” Five minutes later the wife texts
again, “Computer really screwed up now.” So, it’s not only in
Vedànta, but in all forms of communication that common
definitions are important.
If we analyze, we will see that the quality of “having the mind
and intellect fixed in the self” has a cause-effect relationship with
the previous three qualities. The fixing is the product of being
a yogì—one whose mind has an extremely refined capacity for
concentration; of being a yatatma—one whose senses and mind
are disciplined; and of having däáha-niécayaã—firm conviction
regarding the nature of the self. The intellect of one who has
these three qualities will always be focused on his true nature
because such a person enjoys both the knowledge and the mental
refinement required for such focus.
Here, we can see that Krishna specifies manaã and buddhiã—
mind and intellect, respectively. While mind and intellect are
often seen as synonyms, in Indian spirituality they have different
meanings. In fact, Vedànta divides the mind into four faculties:
manaã, buddhiã, cittam and ahaêkàraã—the wavering mind, the
intellect, the memory and the sense of finite individuality. In
Tattva Bodhaã, the author provides a traditional definition for
manaã: “the mind is that which is of the nature of conviction
and doubt.”1
 However, here, when Sri Sankara glosses the word
manaã, he clips doubt from the definition, writing only, “the
mind that is of the nature of conviction.” 2
 As already discussed,
the jñànì’s mind no longer holds doubts regarding the nature of
God. All such doubts have been resolved during his Vedantic
1 Tattva Bodhaã, 7.3.2.2: saëkalpa-vikalpàtmakam manaã
2 saëkalpàtmakam manaã
112
Amritashtakam
study under the guru. Thus, by virtue of that fact, his intellect—
“which is of the nature of conviction” 1
—is pervaded with the
truth of his divine nature. That truth is his intellect’s natural
place of repose. If he does think of objects, he simply witnesses
this process, always remembering that he is not the mind but
the consciousness that is its substratum.
Krishna says the atma-jnani will “always have his mind and
intellect fixed in me.”2
 This and similar statements found in the
scriptures have led to confusion, primarily the misconception
that if one is an atma-jnani he will always be sitting somewhere
with his eyes closed in meditation. Here again we must remember
that the atma-jnani sees everything—all names and forms—as
being imbued with the atma. This understanding serves as the
foundation for all of his interactions. Thus, in one regard, even
if ostensibly he is thinking of an individual—say, a devotee, a
disciple, or even one of his detractors—he is aware that that
individual is also himself with a different name and form. As
the Gita plainly says:
samaë sarveçu bhùteçu tiçâhantaë parameévaram |
vinaéyatsvavinaéyantaë yaã paéyati sa paéyati ||
He who sees the Supreme Lord existing equally in all beings,
the Imperishable in the perishable, truly sees.3
1 Tattva Bodhaã, 7.3.2.2, niécayàtmikà buddhiã
2 The word satatam [always], which comes as the second word in Gita, 12.14,
modifies not only saëtuçâaã—making it mean “always content”—but all the
qualities in the verse. Thus, the verse states the atma-jnani is always a yogì,
always self-controlled, always of firm conviction, always with his mind and
intellect fixed in me.
3 Gita, 13.27
113
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
Thus, the Vedantic vision is not one wherein we think only of
the atma, but one wherein we understand that everything we
think about is essentially the atma.
This is a truth that Amma often highlights in the Krishna
stories she tells. Even though we think of these stories as “Krishna
stories,” if you pay attention you will see the character Amma is
primarily speaking about is not Krishna but his devotee Ràdhà.
Amma glorifies Ràdhà by contrasting her attitudes and actions
with those of her fellow gopìs. Primarily, what separates Ràdhà
from the others is that where the other gopìs are able to see Krishna
as divine, Ràdhà is able to see every aspect of creation as Krishna.
It is incorrect to say that we see “instances” or “examples”
of this vision in Amma’s life because Amma’s entire life is verily
this vision manifested. Her every action reverberates with the
understanding that all beings are divine. People ask Amma, “Do
your devotees worship you?” and Amma responds, “No, it is the
other way. It is I who worship them.”
Since I stand near Amma at the end of her Devì Bhàva
programs, I see up close how literally Amma is doing this,
throwing handful after handful of flowers upon the devotees
who come before her. Although it may be our faith that Amma
is blessing the devotees through this action, Amma says she is
worshipping them. The flowers she offers upon each person are
a form of pùjà wherein Amma is acknowledging “the Supreme
Lord existing in all beings.” Note the care with which Amma
performs this worship. Despite having given darsan for the past
12 or more hours straight, if just one person passes before her
without being showered by petals, Amma will stop everyone
and call that person back. Amma is living proof that one who
has truly assimilated Vedànta sees everything around him—both
animate and inanimate—as an embodiment of the supreme self
and treats it with love and respect.
114
One From Whom the World
Cowers Not & Who Cowers
Not From the World
YASMÀT NA UDVIJATE LOKAÃ
LOKÀT NA UDVIJATE CA YAÃ
Sri Krishna next states two qualities in one, saying that the
parabhakta is both fearless and nonviolent. The line is, yasmàt
na udvijate lokaã lokàt na udvijate ca yaã. Udvijate means to
become agitated, disturbed or afraid. Thus, yasmàt lokaã na
udvijate means, “One of whom the world is not afraid.” Similarly,
Krishna says, yaã lokàt na udvijate ca—“and one who does not fear
the world.”
Claims of fearlessness are common these days. Many bumper
stickers in the West boldly proclaim “No Fear!” However, can
the people who boast such an outlook (if we believe their claims)
also say that the world is unafraid of them? There are many
bullies, dictators—even psychopaths—who, although they may not
be afraid of others, are themselves a source of fear. Thus, Krishna
specifies that not only is the atma-jnani unafraid of others, he
also does not generate fear in others. He is totally peaceful and
nonviolent.
The jñànì’s fearlessness is stated categorically not only in
several places in the Gita, but also throughout the Upanishads.
There, it is explained that the jñànì, by nature of his self-knowledge,
sees everything in the universe with a vision of oneness—i.e. as
ultimately being an extension of his own self. In the individual
in whom such a vision has arisen, there is no longer any scope
for fear because one does not perceive an “other” of which to
be afraid. This truth is beautifully presented in Bähadàraåyaka
115
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
Upanishad in the form of a story involving Prajàpati, the first
embodied being. The story goes that, understanding that he
was the first being, Prajàpati suddenly understood that he was
alone and then, like anyone, became afraid. The story could have
ended there, but then Prajàpati thought, “If there is no one but
me, of whom am I afraid?” It then says that, with this thought,
Prajàpati’s fear immediately subsided. The Upanishad states the
story’s real teaching as being the explanation of the phenomenon
of fear: dvitìyàd-vai bhayaë bhavati—“Fear arises, indeed, from
a second entity.” 1
 In his commentary on the story, Sri Sankara
elucidates, “Prajàpati’s fear was caused only because of ignorance,
which cannot exist when one perceives the supreme reality. ...
It was quite logical that due to the perception of oneness, his
fear vanished. Why? Because fear indeed arises from a second
entity. The perception of duality is overcome by means of the
perception of oneness because, in reality, there is nothing such
as a ‘second entity.’” 2
As discussed before, technically we can say we have
“knowledge” once we’ve fully grasped the Vedantic teaching
regarding our true nature. However, only when we never lose sight
of that teaching—and thus every one of our actions, words and
thoughts are in alignment with it—can we say that our knowledge
is complete. As Amma regularly says, “People have knowledge,
but lack awareness.” She means many of us have grasped Vedànta
but are still incapable of maintaining awareness of its teachings in
difficult scenarios and thus fail to consistently think, speak and
act in concordance with those truths. Only when we maintain
1 Bähadàraåyaka Upanishad, 1.4.2
2 tasya prajàpateryad-bhayaë tat-kevalàvidyà-nimittam-eva paramàrthadarsane’nupapanna-mityàha ... | ... | yaccaikatva-darsanena bhayamapanunoda
tad-yuktam | kasmàt | dvitìtàdvastvantaràdvai bhayaë bhavati tad-ekatvadarsanena dvitìya-darsanamapanìtam-iti nàsti yataã |
116
Amritashtakam
awareness of those truths as we transact in the world will our
knowledge truly be bearing its fruit. Until then we will be like
the old man who was crying in a bar. The bartender asked him
what is wrong and he said, “I have a beautiful young bride at home
who is a great cook and thinks I’m wonderful and handsome
despite my advanced years.” The bartender asked, “What’s so
bad about that? That’s great!” The old man responded, “I can’t
remember where I live.” For knowledge to truly bring us benefit,
it must always be available to us when we require it.
There is perhaps no better litmus test for how much we’ve
assimilated Vedànta than fearful situations. Such situations are
what separate people with mere knowledge from people who
have fully assimilated that knowledge.1
For example, a few years ago, when Amma was in Chennai,
a mother and father brought their son for darsan. He was a
schizophrenic and was shouting and acting extremely violently.
In his late twenties, he also looked quite strong. I was standing
near Amma at the time, helping with translation from Tamil into
Malayalam. The boy was so wild that it took both his parents to
properly contain him as they brought him forward for Amma’s
blessing. As they came closer in the line—I’ll be honest with
1 This is an important concept to understand. Through éravaåam and
mananam—study and clarifying doubts regarding self-knowledge—one is said to
become a jñànì. However, vijñànam [perfection in knowledge] comes through
nididhyàsanam—the practice of constant effort to uproot habitual thinking that
runs contrary to self-knowledge. Thus, while a jñànì may technically know, for
example, that he is a non-performer of actions, he may still react in situations
with full mental identification with the agent. Only when he has uprooted that
habitual identification, can we call him a vijñànì. However, in the Gita and
Upanishads, etc, qualifying terminologies such as these are rarely employed.
Moreover, different commentators and gurus will use different qualifying terms
in their explanations: jñànì, vijñànì; pràjñaã, sthitaprajñaã; jñànì, jñàna-niçâha...
These are just a few examples. Thus, we can see the importance of studying
scriptures under someone competent to help us navigate such passages.
117
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
you—I began to feel a little afraid. The father told me, “Swàmiji,
we don’t know what to do about our son. He’s like this all the
time. Medicines are not working. Some people even believe he’s
possessed. He can be quite violent. He has struck his mother
and me many times. He even occasionally bites us.” By now, the
boy was next in line for darsan, and my heartbeat was increasing.
However, Amma was cool as cucumber. Even after I translated
to Amma what the father had told me—that the boy sometimes
bites people—Amma was totally relaxed. Here I was, two feet
away, full of tension, and there Amma was—with the mouth of
an insane man known for biting right against her neck—fully
relaxed and blissful. This shows total assimilation of Vedànta.
In fact, tense situations are not uncommon around Amma.
When such occasions occur, I sometimes ask Amma about her
fearlessness. Whenever I’ve asked her if she was afraid, Amma
has just laughed at me. Once, when I was watching Amma
repeatedly put her hand directly inside the mouth of one of the
Asram elephants in order to feed him treats, I asked her if she
wasn’t afraid. After all, the molar of a full-grown male elephant
is about the size of a basketball. Amma chuckled and said, “Son,
I don’t know what fear is.”
Wherever Amma looks she sees only a manifestation of
her own self. When one has such a vision, where is the second
entity to be afraid of? It is not that Amma doesn’t see the birds,
the trees, the different people and places. Of course, Amma sees
all this, yet she never loses sight of the underlying oneness. She
knows that her true nature is pure consciousness and that the
entire world around her is nothing but an expression of that
consciousness with various names and forms. From another
angle, Amma knows that even if the body perishes, the atma is
eternal and can never be harmed.
118
Amritashtakam
Unlike with Amma, there is often a very big gap between
what we technically “know” and what we feel inside. I remember
once, a long time ago, when Amma was still giving darsan in a
thatched hut, a lady came and told Amma about a problem she
was going through. She was not getting along with some of her
neighbors. The situation had escalated to the point that they
were even threatening her. Amma told her not to be afraid. The
woman responded, “No, no, no, with Amma, I’m never afraid!
With you in my life, what is there to be afraid of?” The woman
then continued to discuss the problem with Amma. The lady
was so immersed in her conversation that she did not notice
what was happening around her. A long black snake had begun
sliding through thatched leaves of the roof. However, the devotees
sitting around her did see it, and a couple of them jumped up
and started shouting, “Snake! Snake!” At that moment, this
woman—who had just professed how Amma’s presence in her
life had made her fearless—broke free of Amma’s embrace and
ran to the back of the hut. Amma didn’t even get up. As the
snake slithered away, she just laughed.
I am not making fun of that lady. In fact, there is nothing
wrong with fear. Snakes, elephant molars, psychotic people, etc,
indeed can harm us. As such, fear is a natural instinct—a Godgiven alarm system alerting us to danger and prompting us to
act. However, once the instinct has played its role, the fear should
leave us and our calm rational mind should quickly return. Fear
shouldn’t stay with us after it has served its purpose. As Amma
said in an address she delivered at the 150th Birth Anniversary
Celebrations of Swàmì Vivekànanda in New Delhi in 2013,
“Amma is not saying fear is without its purpose. It has a natural
and useful function. For example, if a house catches fire, it would
be foolish to display fearlessness and stay inside. Amma is only
saying that we should not become enslaved by fear.”
119
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
As stated, the Upanishads are emphatic that “Fear arises,
indeed, from a second entity.” Thus, true fearlessness should
only be possible for someone with self-knowledge, who sees the
universe as non-different from his own self. However, we often
hear of people who are definitely not atma-jnanis committing
seemingly fearless acts. First, we should understand that just
because someone risks his life for a given purpose—be it righteous
or unrighteous—does not mean that fear is absent from his
mind throughout the process. As long as one is not firm in the
knowledge that his existence will transcend death, fearlessness
is impossible. That said, it is still possible for non-atma-jnanis
to not fear death. This is because there are two levels of self-knowledge—a lower level and a higher level—and even the lower
level is capable of making one transcend fear of death.
Lower level self-knowledge is learned from studying the
ritualistic portion of the Vedas. For there itself one learns that
the soul is eternal, and that one does not really die when the
body perishes. In fact, all religions teach this truth. It is the
basis of any doctrine involving heaven, hell or rebirth. Yet, we
call this “lower level” self-knowledge because the true nature
of the soul is still unknown. From the ritualistic section of the
Vedas, the self is said to be the performer of actions as well as
the recipient of the results of those actions. It is also said to be
separate from other souls. In fact, the entire ritualistic section of
the Vedas is based on these notions. Therein, one is taught to
perform rituals in order to reap the fruit of travelling to heaven,
etc. However, when one comes to Vedànta, one learns “higher
level” atma-jnanam. Therein the truths about the self that are
taught in the ritualistic section of the Vedas are explained to be
true only from a relative level of reality. From the ultimate truth,
the self is not only eternal but is also one with all other souls
and neither a performer of actions nor a recipient of their results.
120
Amritashtakam
In fact, level-one self-knowledge is intended to be fearinducing. For, religious doctrines about heaven, hell and how
the fruit of our dharmic and adharmic actions return to us in
the form of a just fate—despite being true only from the level of
duality—are taught in order to help mankind live a righteous life.
Such doctrines induce bhaya bhakti—God-fearing devotion—which
is religion’s initial means of keeping mankind righteous. This
is important because, as we see in today’s world, people devoid
of an incentive for being righteous often embrace adharma. It is
dharma that ultimately sustains the world. Without it, this world
will fall into total ruin. However, as we mature in life, dharma
should become our very nature—not something we practice only
out of fear of cosmic retribution. Our life can begin with bhaya
bhakti, but it should not end there. As Amma says, we need to
cultivate proper spiritual understanding and discernment. Once
that arises, we will remain steadfast in dharma no matter what
happens. In level-two self-knowledge, we learn that, from the
ultimate reality of non-duality, the self is neither the agent of
any action nor the reaper of the karmic fruit of any action. One
might think that this knowledge could bring about adharmic
behavior since it reveals that one’s actions have no repercussions
on one’s ture nature. However, by the time we assimilate this
truth, we will be mature enough to remain dharmic despite our
bhaya bhakti having been eradicated by our knowledge.
To understand the origin of the atma-jnani’s nonviolent
and harmless nature, we should return to some of the qualities
mentioned at the beginning of the Amritashtakam, such as sarvabhùtànàm adveçâà—“One who has no hatred for any being.” Seeing
all beings as his own self, the atma-jnani cannot even think of
harming anyone. His only thought is compassion for all. His only
prayer is lokàã samastàã sukhino bhavantu—“May all the beings in
all the worlds be happy.” Furthermore, his inner peace radiates
121
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
on his face, in his actions and in his demeanor. It is not trapped
inside him, as Amma says, “Like honey trapped in a rock.” It is
there on the surface for everyone to enjoy. People feel naturally
at ease with him. Interacting with the mahatma, people know,
“This person harbors no selfish motives.”
In his commentary, Sri Sankara specifies that the person
being spoken of is a sannyàsì—a monk who has formally
renounced the world. There are a number of reasons why Sri
Sankara specifies this, which will be discussed later. [See the
chapter on Aniketaã—One Who Is Homeless.] One reason is
that as a part of the sannyàsì’s initiation into monkhood, he
performs a ritual called abhàya-dànam, wherein he formally
proclaims to the universe that it has nothing to fear from him.
He says three times, abhayaë sarvabhùtebhyaã mattaã svàhà—“Let
there be fearlessness to all beings from me.”1
 The first time he
says this addressing all animals, then addressing his fellow man,
then addressing the demigods. To the animals, he is saying he
will not hunt or eat them or make clothing out them, etc. To
his fellow man, he is saying that he will never harm him and,
moreover, he won’t compete with him over money or jobs or
anything else. To the demigods, he is announcing that they also
don’t have to worry because he won’t try to usurp their positions.
This is necessary because according to the Vedas, demigods—like
Indra, etc—are not fixed entities, but are actually positions won
by individuals who have strove for them by performing requisite
rituals and austerities. When one takes sannyàsa, one vows to
cease all actions aimed at bringing pleasure and comfort for
himself, including such heavenly attainments. Therefore, the
sannyàsì’s proclamation that the world need not fear him is not
mere lip service. Sri Sankara knows that only one who has totally
1 Baudhàyana Gähya Sùtras, 4.16.4
122
Amritashtakam
renounced material life can completely remove himself from all
forms of competition. Thus he stresses that aspect.
Here, it is important to note another aspect of the
harmlessness of the atma-jnani, and that is with regard to the
environment. The world is not afraid or disturbed by the atma-jnani because the jñànì, seeing himself as one with creation, can
never possibly harm the planet. He takes the bare minimum
and gives the maximum. As Amma says, “We should never use
more than we require. Today, everyone uses metal spoons, but
in olden days we used to create spoons from jackfruit leaves in
order to eat kaññi [rice soup]. If we take one leaf, it is out of need.
However, if we take five or six leaves for ourselves, it is incorrect.”
Moreover, a true atma-jnani can never pollute a river.
Seeing every aspect of creation as God, everything as one with
himself, he treats every object in this universe with care and
love. I remember when we built our Asram in Kanyakumari, I
also decided to build a hut on the property for Amma. In order
to do so, I had eight banana trees cut down. When Amma
learned of my actions, she refused to speak to me for three days.
Later that year, Amma instructed me to build a school on the
property. I had someone draw up the plans. I then told Amma
that, in order to build the school, we would have to cut down
35 coconut trees. Amma asked me why, so I showed her the
blueprints. The blueprint was the same as had been used for the
majority of our schools, with the building taking the form of a
straight line. Amma pointed out that all we had to do to save
the trees was to change the blueprint into a zigzag formation.
It had never occurred to me, but once Amma said it, it was so
obvious. In the end not only did we save the 35 coconut trees,
I also had 400 more banana trees planted to make up for the
eight that I had cut down.
123
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
When hearing Krishna say that an atma-jnani doesn’t disturb
the world, we may get a doubt: There has never been a universally
accepted mahatma. Throughout history—from Ràma to Krishna to
Buddha to Jesus—every enlightened being has had his detractors.
It is said Ràvaåa lived in fear of Ràma, Kaësa of Krishna, and
Herod of Jesus. In Amma’s biography, we also read of atheists
who were irritated by her as well, even to the point of trying to
slander and harm her. Thus, is it really correct to say that the
world is not disturbed by the atma-jnani?
In such cases, fear or irritation is not directly caused by the
jñànì. It is either a product of the individual’s misconceptions
regarding the jñànì, his jealousy, or due to his fear that the jñànì
will prevent him from fulfilling adharmic goals. For example,
Herod thought Jesus wanted to be king. Jesus was not interested
in any such thing. He only wanted to teach mankind that the
kingdom of heaven was within—i.e. that they were all already
kings. Ràvaåa’s fear of Ràma was steeped in his desire to continue
to fulfill his selfish desires through unrighteousness means. He
knew Ràma would put an end to that. In essence, the fear is not
the fault of the jñànì but of his detractor.
It is said that some degree of these qualities is required even
before coming to atma-jnanam. As discussed in the Introduction,
there is an intrinsic understanding of our oneness at the core of
the human psyche. It is that understanding that manifests in the
universal values at the foundation of which lies the understanding
that one should “Do unto others as you would have them do
to you.” When we violate such universal values, a rift in our
psyche is created, laying the foundation for mental disturbance.
A disturbed mind can never hope to assimilate Vedànta. Fear
of death and the various vicissitudes of life can be mentally
debilitating. As Amma said in her Swàmì Vivekànanda address
in Delhi in 2013, “Fear causes our minds to shrink and shrivel.
124
Amritashtakam
Our mind becomes like a dried-up well. Fear confines our world
to a small cell of darkness, like that of a turtle that has withdrawn
into its shell upon seeing a predator. It reduces our strength
to a tiny speck. We lose our willpower. On the other hand, a
fearless mind is as vast as the sky.” One with a mind that is like
a dried-up well cannot hope to imbibe the subtle principles of
Vedànta. How then to gain a certain degree of fearlessness before
coming to Vedànta? We have to look to the practice of accepting
everything as God’s gift.
Along these lines, I’ve heard a touching story about a
husband and wife who were on their honeymoon. They were
out in the ocean on a boat. It was a beautiful day and they
were enjoying themselves very much. At a certain point the sky
clouded. Soon rain began to pour. They started trying to make
it back to the shore, but the boat was not very big and did not go
very fast. The rain was collecting in the boat. The husband and
wife began trying to bail out the boat, the bowline of which was
lowering with each gallon of rain that poured inside. Although
both were working hard to bail out the boat, the wife still seemed
very calm. This irritated the husband. He said, “How are you
so calm? Don’t you know that this boat could easily sink and
neither of us know how to swim?” The wife replied by grabbing
a fishing knife from the bottom of the boat and holding it to
her husband’s neck. Smiling she asked him, “Are you afraid?”
The husband responded, “No, of course not.” The wife asked
why? He said, “Because I know you love me.” The wife then
said, “That’s right. Just as you know the one holding the knife
loves you and could never harm you, I also know that the one
wielding this storm loves us and could never harm us either.”
This is the type of fearlessness possible through faith in
God and seeing all as God’s gift—the so-called “good” and the
so-called “bad.” The wife is not saying that they will not drown.
125
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
She is saying that she has the faith that whatever happens will be
God’s prasàdam, and that she knows that God is looking after
them and will take care of them as their eternal support. It is
a fearlessness based on the “level-one atma-jnanam”—knowing
that the soul is eternal. Even though this level of knowledge is
incomplete, it can still generate a tremendous amount of courage
and peace of mind. Similarly, simply by following dharma we
can lead tranquil and non-harmful lives to a great extent.
126
One Who Is Devoid of
Elation, Non-forbearance,
Fear & Anxiety
HARÇÀMARÇA-B○HAYODVEGAIÃ MUKTAÃ
Next we are presented with some review. Krishna says the supreme
devotee is harçàmarça-bhayodvegaiã muktaã—one who is free
from harçaã [elation], amarçaã [non-forbearance], bhayam [fear]
and udvegaã [agitation].
Freedom from elation was already shown in the chapter
on sama duãkha-sukhaã—even-mindedness in the face of both
negative and positive experiences. Happiness is not a problem,
but it should be understood to be our true nature and never
the product of any object. For the atma-jnani, happiness is
experienced one of two ways. Primarily it is born out of his
knowledge that happiness is his true nature. By virtue of that
knowledge alone, he is able to abide in serenity. At the same
time, if for some reason a jñànì experiences happiness in relation
to an object, a situation or an individual, he reminds himself of
the fact that the object itself is not the source of that happiness.
He maintains awareness that he himself, the atma, is the very
foundation for the entire projected universe, including all its
enjoyable objects and the joy that expresses in the mind upon
their experience. Amma—who has fully assimilated Vedànta—
ever abides in the bliss of the self from the very fact of this
understanding. Since there are no desired objects for Amma,
there is never an increase in the happiness reflected in her mind
upon receiving an object, no matter how desirable that object
may seem to others. However, Vedàntins who have yet to fully
assimilate self-knowledge will still experience happiness upon
127
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
the attainment of certain objects, owing to their latent desires
for those objects. When that happiness wells up, that Vedàntin
must reflect upon its source, reminding himself that it is an
expression of his true nature alone.
It should be noted that harça is not mere happiness. It is
extreme elation upon the attainment of an object. Sri Sankara
specifies it to be elation that causes one’s hair to stand on end
and induces one to shed tears. Such extreme responses to the
attainment of objects will never arise for one following the
Vedantic path with alertness. They are only possible for one
who remains ignorant of the nature of the objects of the world
and of the self.
Amarçaã muktaã—freedom from inability to forbear—was
previously presented with kçamì [one who forgives, who is
patient]. The atma-jnani knows that change is the nature of the
world and that he has no control over how it changes. He has
no control over his friends and family. He has no control over
his business associates. Some will behave decently; some will
behave improperly. He accepts all with a smile, knowing that
is how the world is. Amma says that the ability to forbear is
required by all people, not just spiritual aspirants. However, the
difference between the forbearance of a spiritual person and that
of a worldly person is that the former never gives rise to feelings
of vengeance. The spiritual person happily accepts everything
that comes to him in life. When discussing this quality, Amma
points out that this does not necessarily mean that a spiritual
aspirant will never experience negative emotions in the face of
hardships, but that he will remove them through his discernment.
Amma says, “At times, such negative reactions definitely will
come, but those with a spiritual outlook will make sure that they
invoke their discrimination and, thereby, gradually overcome such
128
Amritashtakam
negativities. This is the only way to reach our goal. This is why
it is so important to develop this quality on the spiritual path.”
Really, “elation” and “non-forbearance” are two sides of
a coin. When so-called “good” circumstances arise, the atma-jnani doesn’t rejoice; when difficult times come he forbears them
with a smile. He knows that both the so-called “good” and the
so-called “bad” are part of the ever-changing flux of the universe
and thus he takes them in stride. A beautiful quote I recently
came across by a Zen Buddhist teacher shows an attitude that
can help us become more forbearing: the attitude of seeing every
experience as the guru. “Life always gives us exactly the teacher
we need at every moment. This includes every mosquito, every
misfortune, every red light, every traffic jam, every obnoxious
supervisor, every illness, every loss, every moment of joy or
depression, every addiction, every breath. Every moment is the
guru.” This is because every reaction of the mind presents us with
an opportunity to reflect upon the spiritual teachings regarding
our true nature. What else can you call that but the guru?
Freedom from fear and disturbance was just discussed with
the previous quality. However, another point is elucidated by
an important post-Sankara commentator. 1
 He writes that the
distinction between bhaya and udvegaã is that the former is fear
that occurs in the face of danger itself—for example, turning the
corner and running into a tiger. The latter is tension about the
future. Regardless, both are founded on the same principle already
discussed, and both are remedied by self-knowledge.
1 Madhusùdana Sarasvatì, Bhagavad-Gita Gùáàrtha Dìpikà
129
One Who Is Devoid of Desires
ANAPEKÇAÃ
Apekçaã means one who harbors desires, expectations,
attachments; an anapekçaã is one in whom such signs of
discontentment and dependence are absent. In his commentary,
Sri Sankara makes sure we understand the extent of the atma-jnani’s desirelessness. He is devoid of desires and expectations
when it comes to sense objects, and also with regard to his own
body and sense organs. 1
 In essence, anapekçaã means someone
who knows that his existence is completely independent of the
body and mind and whose sense of peace, contentment and
happiness are similarly independent of them as well.
When we think of Amma, what do most of us think of?
Her fathomless tangible love. To some degree, we have all
experienced it—both directly, in Amma’s arms, and indirectly,
through witnessing how consistently she disregards her own
comfort in order to compassionately help those in need. Why
is Amma’s love so powerful and immense? The reason is her
desirelessness—her total independence. Amma’s ability to love is
so strong because she never bases happiness on the fulfillment
of any desire. She knows that peace, happiness and contentment
are her true nature. Only when our own inner experience of love
is stripped of dependencies can we manifest that love externally
in a manner devoid of expectations.
A few years back someone asked Amma about this,
specifically how her love was different from that of the love we
1 Dehendriya-viçaya-sambandhàdiçu apekça-viçayeçu anapekço niãspähaã—
“With regard to the things [most people are] concerned with, such as the body,
the senses, the sense objects and their interconnection, etc, he is indifferent—
without desire.”
130
Amritashtakam
see in the world. How could Amma say her love was “selfless”?
Amma responded, “Because there is no expectation of anything
in return. I have no expectations from anyone. So, it is selfless
love. Parents bring up their children with love, but that love is
mixed with expectations. They think their children will look
after them in their old age. There is nothing wrong in that—it is
the way of the world—but I don’t have such expectations.” Then
Amma revealed the extent of desirelessness required to love
others at her level: “For me, there is no such thing as death. So,
I have no fear of death. I live in the present moment and do not
think about the future. Other people think about the future. As
the child grows up, expectations begin, and the parents begin to
become dependent upon their children. But I live on my own.
I am totally self-dependent.”
In fact, Amma’s answer is the perfect commentary on why
the atma-jnani harbors no desires. Just as Sri Sankara says in his
commentary, Amma was saying that one who has fully assimilated
self-knowledge doesn’t even have any desires with regard to his
own body; his happiness isn’t connected to the maintenance
of his physical health or even his life. Why? Because the jñànì
knows, “There is no such thing as death.”
When Amma says this, it doesn’t mean that she believes
her body will never die. It means she knows that she is not the
body and, therefore, that even when the body dies, she will
continue to exist as pure consciousness-existence-bliss. As Amma
says, “When a light bulb burns out or a fan stops spinning, it
doesn’t mean that there is no electricity. When we stop fanning
ourselves with a hand-held fan, the flow of air stops, but this
doesn’t mean that there’s no air. Or when a balloon bursts, it
doesn’t mean that the air that was in the balloon ceases to exist.
It is still there. In the same way, the atma is everywhere. God
is everywhere. Death occurs, not because of the absence of the
131
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
atma, but because of the destruction of the instrument known
as the body. At the time of death, the body ceases to manifest
consciousness. So, death marks the breakdown of the instrument,
and not any imperfection in the atma.”
The atma-jnani knows he is not dependent upon the body
or mind for his existence. Rather, it is the body and mind that
are dependent upon him, the atma. Moreover, he knows that,
as the atma, bliss is his very nature, regardless of whether or not
at any given moment that bliss is reflecting in the mind. This
is self-knowledge, and this is why the atma-jnani is “desireless.”
Here a doubt can arise: Doesn’t Amma have desires? After
all, there is an oft-quoted saying of Amma’s that goes:
“Everyone in the world should be able to sleep without fear,
at least for one night. Everyone should be able to eat to his
fill, at least for one day. There should be at least one day
when hospitals see no one admitted due to violence. By
doing selfless service for at least one day, everyone should
help the poor and needy. May at least this small dream be
realized.”
Reading this, how can we say Amma is desireless? When we
say “the atma-jnani is desireless,” we need to understand the
term properly and from two different levels—the jñànì’s mind
and the atma.
From the level of the mind, it doesn’t mean that the jñànì
doesn’t have any desires at all, but that his mind doesn’t have
any selfish desires. Where most people’s minds have selfish
desires, the mind of the jñànì has desires that, when fulfilled,
uplift humankind and contribute to the universal harmony. For
example, lokàã samasthàã sukhino bhavantu—“May all beings in
all the worlds be happy.” Moreover, despite having such selfless
desires, even if those desires remain unfulfilled, the jñànì will
not become irritated or depressed. Having nothing to gain for
132
Amritashtakam
himself, the jñànì lives only to uplift humankind, spiritually and
materially. Yet, his happiness, contentment and mental peace are
eternally independent of whether or not he succeeds in bringing
about that upliftment. In this regard I am reminded of Amma’s
answer to a question someone recently asked her. Reflecting upon
all the humanitarian institutions that Amma has started in the
past 20 years, this person asked Amma if she was proud of all
her achievements. Amma responded, “Son, I am not attached to
any of these things. I can go just like that, shedding my skin like
a snake. While I am here I am trying to help people; that is all.”
Being devoid of selfish desires and not becoming upset if
one’s selfless desires are unfulfilled is desirelessness from the
level of the mind. However, there is another higher perspective
from which the atma-jnani is categorically desireless. Remember,
desires are of the mind, and just as the jñànì doesn’t identify with
his body, he also doesn’t identify with his mind. Thus he doesn’t
even see those selfless, unshackling desires as being his desires
in the first place. The atma is of the nature of consciousness. If
anything, it can only witness desires, not harbor them—be they
selfish or selfless. In fact, it is this higher level of “desirelessness”
that allows the jñànì to be detached with regard to the fulfillment
or nonfulfillment of his selfless desires. As the 14th century
Sankaracharya Swàmì Vidyaraåya states in his classic Vedantic
treatise Pañcadaéì:
apraveéya cid-atmanaë päthak-paéyannahaêkätim |
icchaëstu koâi-vastùni na bàdho granthi-bhedataã ||
By differentiating the consciousness that is one’s true nature
from the ego, though [the atma-jnani] may have millions
of desires, there is no harm, for he has severed the knot
between atma and anatma.
1
1 Pañcadaéì, 6.262
133
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
If we are honest, most of us will accept that we still have a lot of
desires. At the same time, as seekers, we know that if we want to
make spiritual progress, we must start eliminating these desires.
In fact, one of the main qualifications for coming to Vedànta is at
least a relative degree of detachment—vairàgyam—and detachment
is really no different from being free from desires. The peak of
desirelessness—a desirelessness even with regard to one’s own
health and life—can come only with the understanding and
awareness that one is in no way connected to the physical body.
If so, how does one begin to cull his mind of grosser desires?
To understand where to begin, we should analyze the various
types of desires. We can divide desires into two main types:
adharmic desires and dharmic desires. Adharmic desires are
unethical: the desire to steal, the desire to harm and kill others,
etc. In essence, any desire that violates the Golden Rule of “Do
unto others as you would have them do unto you.” Removal of
such adharmic desires is not only the foundation of becoming
desireless but also of becoming just a decent human being. We
have to begin there: Any desire the fulfillment of which would
cheat or harm another being needs to be ruthlessly terminated.
The second type of desire is dharmic desire. These desires
are totally normal and righteous: the desire to save money, to
have a house, to have clothing, to be healthy, to have a family
and to be able to provide for that family, to have a good job, etc.
There is nothing wrong with such desires, but we have to be
careful with them. Our entire life should not be dedicated solely
to their fulfillment. Thus, when it comes to the proportion of
our mental and physical activity occupied by such desires and
their fulfillment, we must be alert. As spiritual aspirants, we
need to make sure that we leave adequate time for spirituality—for
helping others, for social service, for doing our meditation, arcana
and japa, for studying the scriptures and guru’s teachings, etc.
134
Amritashtakam
In 2006, in the address Amma delivered on her 53rd birthday,
Amma gave a nice example that illustrates this point. She said,
“Pursuit of dharma, wealth, pleasure and liberation are said to
be the four pillars of life. In today’s world, awareness of dharma
is being lost. The desire for liberation is also in decline. What
remains are only the pursuit of money and pleasure. Thus,
today’s society is like a car with its front tires gone flat. For real
progress to take place, the pursuit of money and pleasure are
not enough.” The front tires of the car are the ones that turn
and thus dictate the direction of the car. In comparing dharma
and liberation to the front tires, Amma was pointing out that
that the pursuit of money and pleasure should always remain
subservient to these two higher goals. Thus it is important to
ensure that the pursuit of money and pleasure—even if within the
confines of dharma—never come at the expense of one’s pursuit
of liberation. Ensuring this is the second level of desire control.
The foundation of pruning the mind of adharmic desires is
to understand why they are harmful to us. We should understand
and ruminate on the fact that the damage caused to our psyche
by violating dharma always outweighs any potential material
benefit. Since the psychological ramifications of engaging in
unrighteousness are not always immediate, this foundational
understanding must be clear. Only then will we become alert
when adharmic desires enter our mind. In fact, the conscience
is a God-given alarm system. Its prick is alerting us to the fact
that what we are doing or are about to do is detrimental to our
psyche. The more we refine our mind, the stronger this alarm
system will become. However, the more we ignore this alarm,
the quieter it will become. Eventually, we will not even hear it.
When the alarm system burns out completely, it is difficult to
repair. So, we must be careful.
135
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
Cultivating this discernment is crucial for removing
unrighteous desires. However, the process doesn’t end there.
We all have had the experience of knowing something is wrong
but doing it anyway. Thus, we also must cultivate éamaã [mental
discipline] and damaã [sensory discipline]. Mental discipline is the
ability to change the direction of our thoughts when adharmic
desires arise—to flip the mental channel, as it were. Sensory
discipline is the practice of avoiding the very people, places and
situations, etc, that trigger our latent desires in the first place.
[For more on these disciplines see the chapter on Yatatma.]
What about our desires that are not against dharma but at
the same time are materialistic? How do we ensure they do not
get out of hand? We have to live a life of reflection. We have to
cultivate awareness regarding where our life is headed and how
our goals are changing. We have to bring back to our awareness
that the fulfillment we are seeking can never come from such
desires. The fulfillment they seem to offer is like the horizon;
no matter how far you walk toward it, that much it will recede.
Furthermore, we must remind ourselves that as much temporary
happiness we allow ourselves to take from them, that much
sorrow they will eventually cause us. Discerning thus, we can
ensure that our life remains balanced and that we don’t lose
sight of the spiritual goal. Then, with the dharmic materialistic
desires we do retain, we can cultivate an attitude of acceptance.
If we can offer our efforts to fulfill them as worship and accept
their fulfillment and nonfulfillment alike as God’s prasàdam,
we will thereby disempower them of their ability to disturb our
peace of mind.
Up to this level of desire control, Vedànta is not required.
However, for the final stage it is absolutely necessary. The final
stage is becoming like Amma—one whose only desires are selfless
and whose peace, happiness and contentment are in no way
136
Amritashtakam
associated with the fulfillment of those desires. As discussed, our
desires only become totally selfless through understanding that
our existence and happiness are in no way dependent upon the
body-mind complex. Moreover, the peak of desirelessness comes
when we sever our identification with even that selfless desirer:
“Let the mind have millions of selfless desires! I am not the mind;
I am the ever-detached and blissful consciousness. If they are
fulfilled fantastic; if they are unfulfilled, that is also fine.” Such a
level of spiritual perfection can only come through studying and
assimilating the truths taught to us by the scriptures and guru.
137
One Who Is Pure
ÉUCIÃ
The next characteristic of the supreme devotee is éuciã—one who
is pure. Sri Sankara clarifies, “One who is endowed with both
external and internal purity.” 1
 External purity not only refers to
the purity of our surroundings and of our physical body but also
to the purity of our conduct—how we talk and act. Internal purity
is referring to the purity of our mind—our thoughts, emotions
and attitudes. Thus, Sri Krishna is saying that the atma-jnani would
not only unhesitatingly welcome impromptu inspections of his
home, but also of his mind.
In the old days, when Amma’s time wasn’t totally occupied
with darsan, Amma would regularly come to the various huts
and seva departments for unannounced inspections. I remember
one such kitchen inspection. Amma looked in one place, then
another, checked the dust on the shelves, checked the garbage
pails for excess waste. Everything looked good, and all the
brahmacàriåìs doing seva there sighed in relief. Then, suddenly,
Amma walked over to a big pot sitting in the corner. When she
went to lift it, her hands came away covered in soot. She then
pointed out that the same pot had been sitting there unwashed
since the last time she had inspected the kitchen. “Two weeks
back I saw this pot but didn’t say anything because I wanted to
see if any of you would wash it without being asked. This shows
your lack of éraddha 2
. If any of you had any éraddha, you would
not have left it sitting here like this. A person without éraddha
1 bàhyena abhyantareåa ca éaucena sampannaã
2 In Sanskrit, éraddhà means faith, but in Amma’s language of Malayalam it
primarily means alertness, care and attention to detail.
138
Amritashtakam
is unfit to be a spiritual seeker. Lack of éraddha externally will
lead to lack of éraddha internally as well.”
The worst thing about Amma’s surprise inspections is that
when she finds something dirty, she will almost always clean it
herself without letting anyone help her, which she did on this
occasion as well.
As Amma pointed out, maintaining the cleanliness of one’s
environment and body is the foundation of all purity. One who
cannot keep his grossest aspects clean has little hope of doing
so with the subtlest.
Here, we may get a doubt. In Amma’s biography, we read
that there were times when she totally ignored external purity.
She would go without bathing. She would eat things like fish
dropped from the talons of kites. She would even sit in the bog
of the backwaters lost in meditation. When we read of such
incidents, we should understand that Amma did not do any of
these things intentionally. Her disregard to her cleanliness was
due to her being lost in the bliss of the self. Such spontaneous
disregard for one’s surroundings and physical condition may
come for one who has attained atma-jnanam. In some rare cases,
it can also happen for a seeker who has become one-pointed in
his spiritual practices. Thus, if it comes without our awareness as
a result of our devotion, it is acceptable, but never as a planned
course of action or from neglect. We should never think, “I am
a spiritual aspirant; let me not waste time bathing or cleaning.”
Such thoughts are almost always born of laziness. If you are a
spiritual aspirant, then take it as a spiritual practice to clean
yourself and your environment.
We should not think that external purity ends with physical
cleanliness. Even if we take three baths a day and our house looks
like something out of Better Homes & Gardens, if our behavior is
foul, then we have yet to attain external purity. Thus, “external
139
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
purity” also means that the atma-jnani is always a pleasant
person, ever helpful and kind, with sweet words always at the
ready, quick with a smile and a hand. That said, we all know
people who externally are extremely kind but who secretly are
cursing anyone and everyone. They may have some degree of
external purity, but internally they are still a mess. So, by saying
“internal purity,” we mean that there is no such duplicity in the
jñànì. His kindness and good character are not a mask but are
his true face.
Although in some extreme exceptions external cleanliness
may be absent in the atma-jnani, there are no exceptions with
regard to internal cleanliness. Mental purity will be found even
in the most unorthodox of avadhùtas 1
. What is mental purity? A
mind devoid of animosity, jealousy, greed or any other thought,
emotion or attitude incongruous with self-knowledge. Negative
emotions and attitudes are rooted in erroneous perceptions
regarding our own true nature or the true nature of the world.
Thus, they cannot exist in one who has clear understanding. As
Amma often points out, “How can one who truly understands
that the ‘I’ in me is the ‘I’ in him, ever become jealous or angry
at another person?”
In the end, it is self-knowledge that is the ultimate purifier.
This is something that Krishna emphatically states in the Gita:
na hi jñànena sadäéaë pavitram-iha vidyate—“Indeed, there is no
purifier here comparable to knowledge.”2
 He says this because
it is our understanding of something that dictates our attitude
toward it, and our attitude that dictates our thoughts, words
and actions. Thus, our understanding regarding our nature, the
1 An atma-jnani who, for whatever reason, does not conform to social or
scriptural norms.
2 Gita, 4.38
140
Amritashtakam
nature of the universe, and the nature of God is the final fire
that burns away all the dross aspects of our personality.
At the same time, a relative degree of purity is required
even for coming to atma-jnanam. How can we bring this purity
about? Obviously, atma-jnanam is not required for keeping our
body and environment clean. It is also not required for behaving
properly. We all know many extremely decent people who have
never even heard of Vedànta; some of them may even be atheists.
Even mental purity, in terms of dulling the effect of our likes and
dislikes and reducing negative emotions, can be brought about by
karma yoga and other spiritual practices. Thus, when Krishna says
that knowledge is the ultimate purifier, he is really saying that
no other spiritual practice can remove the ahaêkàra. Ahaêkàra
is the impurity that pollutes our concept of “I” with the idea that
we are a limited individual who is both the performer of actions
and the enjoyer of their results. In fact, it is this impurity with
regard to “I” that makes us feel disconnected from God as well
as from other beings. As we said before, “I” is not the problem;
the problem is our distorted concept of “I.” As our distorted
concepts are all founded on ignorance, they can only be rectified
through knowledge.
141
One Who Is Efficient
DAKÇAÃ
Just as some people have the misconception that, due to the
mind reveling in the self, a devotee will be loose with cleanliness
and order, so too some people believe he will be inefficient and
sloppy with regard to his actions. Just as Sri Krishna negated the
former with éuciã [purity], now he negates the latter with dakçaã.
Dakçaã means one who is efficient, capable, skillful. With this
quality, Krishna is saying, that as life unfolds and its various issues
present themselves, the jñànì quickly sees to the heart of each
matter, ascertains what is and isn’t required and acts, or doesn’t
act, accordingly.
When the Indian Ocean tsunami hit the coast of Kerala
in 2004, no one expected it and there was no precedent. Yet,
within minutes, Amma herself was down in the floodwaters,
calling all the shots. She sent one group of people to get all the
boats on the peninsula for ferrying people across the backwaters
to safety. She sent another group to start shifting the soaked
40-kilogram sacks of rice from the kitchen to the college, which
she immediately decided would become a refugee camp. She
sent another group to evacuate the elderly and invalids from the
Asram’s charitable hospital. She told the person in charge of the
International Office to bring all the foreigners’ documents across.
She sent another group to go look in the area surrounding the
Asram for people who may be injured. Aware of the fact that if
family members didn’t cross the backwaters as a group, it could
take them days to locate each other, Amma made people wait
until they found everyone in their family before allowing them
to enter a boat. Knowing another wave could come, Amma
even sent the Asram cows and elephants into the temple hall,
142
Amritashtakam
the floor of which is an extra 15-feet above sea level. Amma’s
mind was like a supercomputer working at top speed, constantly
assessing, evaluating and setting people and things into motion.
Since the tragedy, many senior officials who work in disaster
management have asked Amma about the decisions she made
that day. They have all wanted to know from where her brilliance
and skill in action came? How did she manage to think of so
many subtle aspects? When one such official asked Amma, she
responded, “For me, there is no planning; everything just comes
spontaneously.” How is this possible?
As part of a traditional study of Vedànta, one also studies
tàrka éàstra—the science of logic. As per Vedantic logic, the mind
has six pramàåams—or valid means of knowledge. These are
pratyakça—knowledge born of sensory perception; upamàna—
knowledge gained through comparison; anupalabdhi—knowledge
gained through non-perception; anumànam—knowledge gained
through inference; arthàpatti—postulation; and éabda—knowledge
of facts gained through the Vedas and other testimonies. Without
going into detail, these are the various means for the mind to
learn and think. For example, I see smoke on a mountaintop
and I think, “There must be fire up there.” This is a form of
inference. In fact the mind is running a process: “I see smoke
coming from the top of that mountain. Whenever I have seen
smoke in the past, there has been fire. Therefore, there must be
fire on the mountaintop now.” In a refined mind, such processes
take place in the blink of an eye, automatically and naturally.
According to the logic texts, all the data we gain is from either
sensory perception or testimony (scriptural and worldly), and all
the various conclusions we draw regarding that data are derived
via the mental processes that are the other four pramàåams.
All of us have minds. Some of us have supercomputer minds
and some of us seem to be using an outdated operating system.
143
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
Why is the atma-jnani’s mind so quick? Why is he able to see
every situation as it truly is and, as if punching a calculation
into a machine, come up with so many solutions? The answer is
simple: His mind is totally refined and all these mental processes
are able to work at full efficiency. In fact, it is the previous quality
of mental purity—including the ultimate mental purity that comes
via self-knowledge—that has made him so efficient. Remember,
through meditation, the jñànì’s mind has been made capable of
laser-like focus. Through karma yoga, his mind has been stripped
of distractions in the form of likes and dislikes. And, finally,
through his study of Vedànta, he has attained the knowledge
that he himself is the source of all happiness. Thus, his mind is
no longer goaded by thoughts aimed at trying to find happiness
in external objects. Moreover, he understands that all material
phenomena are but superficial names and forms that have risen
from the eternal substratum of the self. Thus, he is no longer
limited by anxiety and fear. What remains is a spiritual educated
mind that is fully available to apply itself to whatever situation
may be at hand. Such a mind absorbs the data presented to it
and runs all the various analytical processes and comes up with
various solutions at lighting speed.
144
One Who Is Impartial
UDÀSÌNAÃ
Udàsìnaã means one who is impartial. The atma-jnani views all
the various aspects of the world—its people, places and things—
as his own self appearing with manifold temporary names and
forms. As Amma says, “In the same way that everyone knows
that the necklace, the earring and the bangle are all nothing but
gold, one who understands the ultimate truth of this universe
knows that everything he sees is God.” In the fifth chapter of the
Bhagavad-Gita, there is an oft-quoted verse presenting this vision:
vidyà-vinaya-saëpanne bràhmaåe gavi hastini |
éuni caiva évapàke ca paåáitàã sama-daréinaã ||
Men of learning see with equal vision a bràhmaåa endowed
with knowledge and humility, a cow, an elephant, a dog,
even a dog-eater.1
When viewing the world through this ultimate perspective—in
which name and form, and all qualities good and bad, are
discarded as superfluous—how can the atma-jnani favor one
person over another?
When explaining udàsìnaã, Sri Sankara, specifically notes
that the atma-jnani doesn’t favor any friends. 2
 Why? Because,
as Krishna has already said at the outset of the Amritashtakam, the
atma-jnani is sarva-bhùtànàë maitraã—a friend to all beings.
Therefore, when there is an argument or competition, it is not
really that he doesn’t favor his friends but that—seeing both parties
as his friends—he wants the best for both. Along these lines,
1 Gita, 5.18
2 na kasyacid mitràdeã paksaë bhajate yaã sa udàsìnaã
145
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
sometimes before governmental elections people will ask Amma
if she is going to vote. Amma always says, “If I were allowed to
vote for each candidate, then I would vote. I am a mother. How
can a mother choose one child over another?”
The fact is, Amma sees everyone as a divine extension of
her own self. When viewing the world through this perspective,
anyone will have difficulty taking sides. I remember once, in the
early days of the Asram, we were having problems with a thief.
Small things kept disappearing from here and there, even some
money. Either the thief was very clever or we were easily tricked
because weeks went by without anyone being able to catch him.
Then, finally, one of the Asram residents spied the culprit in the
act. It was a young boy from one of the nearby houses, about
10. He tried to run but was caught. The Asram resident tied the
boy’s hands behind his back with a cloth and brought him to
Amma. However, when Amma saw him, she just closed her eyes
in meditation. We waited, but Amma showed no signs of stirring.
In the end we just let the boy go. When Amma did open her
eyes, I asked her why she had entered such a sublime state upon
seeing the boy. Amma said, “Seeing him standing there with his
hands behind his back reminded me of Sri Krishna.”1
Don’t get the wrong idea. Just because, in this particular
instance, Amma decided to view things from a transcendent
perspective, doesn’t mean that mahatmas cannot take decisions
in the day-to-day world. Even in this circumstance, Amma was in
fact making a decision because, despite being let off the hook, the
boy never stole from the Asram again. Amma knew that he had
learned his lesson and there was no need to involve his parents
or the village authorities. The mahatma’s impartiality doesn’t
limit his ability to make decisions. After all, Krishna has just said
1 In his youth, Krishna often would steal butter from his fellow villagers. Once,
to make him stop, his stepmother, Yaçoda, tied his hands behind his back.
146
Amritashtakam
the jñànì is dakçaã [efficient] with regard to the various matters
that arise before him. The supreme perspective of seeing all as
the self only explains why the mahatma cannot favor one person
over another in the same way that a father will favor his son over
his neighbor’s son, etc. The atma-jnani definitely perceives the
relative world, and he does indeed know that, from the relative
perspective, there is a difference between a learned and humble
person and a cruel person with no culture. He does know that
there is a difference between an elephant, a cow and a dog, etc.
It’s just that he never loses sight of the substratum of these various
beings. Just because we know the necklace, earring and bangle
are all gold doesn’t mean that we become confused about which
part of the body they are designed to adorn.
So, how does the mahatma make decisions? For this, he
only has one means of evaluation. Not “With whom do I share
more blood?” Not “With whom do I have more in common?”
Not “With whom do I have stronger business/political ties?”
But only “Who is aligned with dharma? What should be done
from that perspective?”
In fact, the majority of people know that impartiality
is a virtue to which they should adhere. However, they are
overpowered by their attachments and desires and thus find that,
despite knowing they are being partial, they cannot act otherwise.
By power of his knowledge, the jñànì has transcended such
attachments and is able to think, speak and act in accordance
with universal laws of righteousness.
Actually, the quality of impartiality sheds new light on the
previous quality of dakça [efficiency] as well. This is because it
reveals to us another area in which the jñànì is efficient. That
area is with regard to knowing when he should view a situation
from the “supreme perspective” wherein all is seen to be the self,
and when he should view a situation from the “transactional
147
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
perspective,” wherein the relative differences come into the
foreground.1
 In fact, developing discrimination with regard to
this is a subtle, but crucial, aspect of spirituality. Many people
have trouble negotiating this, despite being longtime spiritual
aspirants. The result can often be rather comedic.
I will give you an example that took place several years ago
during Amma’s North India Tour. Amma was conducting three
days of programs at her Asram in Bangalore. Just outside the Asram,
there is an enormous banyan tree that has been there for so long
that it has become both a place and object of worship for the local
villagers. In the unique vision of India, the tree is both temple
and God at the same time. After Amma’s tour group arrived, one
devotee, about 20 years old, saw the tree in the distance and decided
to walk to it. When he reached the tree, he tangibly experienced the
purity of its environment and decided to sit down and chant the
Lalità Sahasranàma. After chanting 100 names or so, he decided
that he wanted to climb the tree and sit peacefully on one of its
branches as he completed his arcana. So, he did. Fortunately or
unfortunately, the villagers saw him sitting there—sitting atop their
temple, their God—and came running over and started shouting at
him. The young man didn’t understand why they were so upset, so,
he just kept on chanting. That is when the rocks started coming
at him, which of course did the trick.
Later, the whole story was related to Amma. The young
man told Amma, “I don’t understand. Everything is God. Not
just the tree. Even the sandals on these people’s feet are God,
but they don’t feel it’s offensive that they are standing on them!”
Amma told him, “That’s right, son. Everything is God. But
just because fire is God, would you sit in it? Urine is also God,
but would you urinate on a religious symbol?”
1 These perspectives are referred to in the scriptures as the paramàrthika däçâi
and the vyàvahàrika däçâi, respectively.
148
Amritashtakam
Amma was reminding him that just because everything is
the all-pervasive divine self doesn’t mean that we stop conforming
to social and practical norms. Open the symbolic third eye of
unity, but don’t close the two normal eyes of duality. When you
close your eyes in meditation, let duality fall away and appreciate
everything as one. When you go about your daily affairs, let
duality be in the foreground, while maintaining your non-dual
understanding in the background. Otherwise, you will make a
mess of life.
149
One Who Is Free From
Emotional Pain
GATAVYATHAÃ
The next quality stated by Krishna is gatavyathaã. In this context,
vyathà means emotional pain. Gatavyathaã means a person
whose heart has become incapable of being emotionally hurt.
Moreover any emotional scars that were once there have also
been debrided through the power of his self-knowledge.
Total emotional resilience is only possible when we become
capable of fully accepting everything that happens in life—events
in the past, events in the present and events in the future. It is
in fact the boundaries that we set up in order to protect ourselves
emotionally—boundaries in the form of “I” and “mine”—that
expose us to potential emotional injury. The boundless heart
cannot be wounded for it has no such fortifications. In its
inclusion of everyone and everything, it leaves nothing outside
to assail it. Thus, the atma-jnani has no expectations with regard
to the relationships in his life. He knows that everyone in this
world will act according to his own nature, and he therefore
accepts praise and criticism, fondness and antagonism, and
success and failure as the nature of life. He doesn’t even harbor
any expectations with regard to his own body or mind. He accepts
everything that comes, knowing that it is but the ebb and flow of
the transitory reality we refer to as the universe. When hardship
comes his away—as it does for everyone in this world—he stands
detached from his own maltreatment, even his persecution, as
if watching a film. As Amma always says, “He lives in the world
detached, like butter floating on the surface of water.”
150
Amritashtakam
How many people during the past 60 years have attacked
or ridiculed Amma? How many names has she been called by
the ignorant and petty? How many times has she been attacked
physically? How many people who once told her that they want
to dedicate their lives to her and her charitable mission have
changed their minds—some even turning their back on her? Of
course, Amma has never asked anyone to make such pledges.
My point is only that Amma has faced more adversity than
most people face in 1,000 lives, but none of it has ever dulled
her shine, even for a moment. It has never made her depressed.
It has never caused her to bear ill will toward anyone. It has
never made her stop helping people or seeing everyone as her
beloved child.
Last year, during one of Amma’s question-and-answer
sessions in Amritapuri, someone asked Amma how she was
able to endure all the difficulties she experienced in her youth.
Amma responded, “An awareness of my own true nature as well
as the true nature of the world was always with me. Established
in these principles, it was always clear that the supreme self is
the only thing that can ever provide real strength and support.
The love we experience from the world is always tinged with
selfishness; it is temporary.”
If we reflect, we will see that all of our emotional wounds
have come because of some expectation. We expect someone
to be there and love us forever, and they leave us. We expect
someone to be honest with us, and they lie to us. We expect
someone to treat us with respect, and they ridicule us in front of
others. The majority of people live not in the real world but in
a world fashioned in the form of their expectations. Tragically,
expectations make for a fragile edifice, and when that scaffolding
breaks, the world we were living in falls apart and we become
injured emotionally. Therefore, the jñànì understands that
151
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
anything can happen to him or to his friends and relations at
any moment. He lives with that awareness. At the same time,
he remembers that he—in his true nature—is not in any way
dependent on the world. In this way, not only is he not surprised
when adverse situations and failures arise, he is also emotionally
at peace throughout the process. He knows that everything that
happens in the world—the so-called “good” and the so-called
“bad”—is but a mere drama. He simply watches this drama
unfold upon the screen of the supreme consciousness that is
his true nature.
Amma often points out that our emotional scars bind us,
like prisons. Therefore, it is in our best interest to confront them
and put in the effort to change our thinking regarding the issues
that created them. Until we do so, self-realization will remain a
distant dream. Why? Because each emotional scar is an indicator
that we are still identifying with the body and mind, that we are
still claiming people, places and things as “mine,” that we still
believe we have the right and power to control aspects of creation.
All such attitudes are antithetical to self-knowledge, which says
“I am neither the body nor the mind; I have no possessions,
no relationships, no powers or rights to control people and
situations. I am the bliss that is ever apart, the peaceful witness
consciousness. As such, I accept everything within and without,
totally devoid of expectations.”
152
One Who Has Renounced
All Undertakings
SARVÀRAMBHA PARITYÀGÌ
Sri Krishna now says that the parabhakta will be a sarvàrambha
parityàgì—one who has renounced all undertakings. The concept
that spiritual life culminates in the rejection of actions is difficult
to understand. We will investigate this in more detail with the
upcoming quality of éubhàéubha parityàgì—one who renounces
both the auspicious and inauspicious. With the quality at
hand, we will limit the atma-jnani’s renunciation of action, as
per Sri Sankara’s commentary, to “the renunciation of actions
undertaken out of desire for the purpose of enjoying the fruit,
here or hereafter.”1
In the context of the periods of time when Sri Krishna and
Sri Sankara lived, this quality specifically refers to the cessation
of Vedic rites aimed at material gain, known as kàmya karmas.
When we look at the ritualistic portion of the Vedas, we see that
it is full of such rites. Some of those rituals are for attaining such
benefits while we are still living this current life—for example,
rituals for a spouse, a child, money, long life, etc. Other rituals are
aimed at attaining material gain after we die—specifically sojourns
to heaven or becoming a demigod. While the latter goals may
initially sound spiritual to us, if we contemplate we will see that
they are purely material in nature. Despite being “otherworldly,”
they are very much “worldly.” What is heaven but a superior
1 ihàmutra-phala-bhogàrthàni kàma-hetùni karmàåi sarvàrambhàã tàn
parityaktuë éìlam asya iti sarvàrambha-parityàgì—“Sarvàrambhàã means works
undertaken out of desire for the purpose of enjoying the fruit here or hereafter.
He who is apt to give them up is a sarvàrambha parityàgì.”
153
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
house with superior neighbors? What is becoming a demigod
but gaining a superior body and mind? The Indian spiritual
tradition says that none of these have anything whatsoever to
do with spirituality, which is abiding blissfully in our own true
“spirit,” the eternal self. Thus, here, Krishna is saying the jñànì
will categorically cease performing any such rites.
In today’s day and age, very few people perform any rites—
Vedic or non-Vedic—at all, be they selfish or selfless. Thus, we
can expand the meaning of this statement beyond the confines
of Vedic rites to mean that the jñànì will cease any action aimed
at attaining for himself pleasure, comfort or security. The reasons
for this have been discussed at length already, but are perhaps
best summed up by Krishna himself
yàvàn artha udapàne sarvataã saëplutodake |
tàvàn sarveçu vedeçu bràhmaåasya vijànataã ||
To an enlightened bràhmaåa 1
, all the Vedic rites are as
useful as a water-tank when there is a flood everywhere. 2
Krishna is saying, when we have realized our own true nature to
be the very source of all experiential bliss, why would we perform
any ritual for the purpose of experiencing happiness through
material gains? In fact, why would we perform any action—be it
religious or mundane—to achieve such an end?
The devotees and disciples of Amma are very much aware
of how much strain she puts on her physical body. This lifestyle
of hers, wherein nothing is ever done with a self-serving motive,
can be rather frustrating for us. We want Amma to take a break
and do something that we would consider relaxing. Yet, Amma is
1 In this context, bràhmaåa does not refer to one born into a specific caste,
but one of a disciplined and refined mind.
2 Gita, 2.46
154
Amritashtakam
not interested. I remember a few years back one devotee came for
darsan and said, “Amma, why can’t you take a vacation? Perhaps
you could go to Hawaii and relax on the beach. We devotees
would pay for it, and you could rest your body for a week or so.”
Laughing and giving the man a compassionate smile, Amma
answered, “You have a son. If he were sick or sad or needed you,
would you be able to just take off and go to the beach? Of course
not. You would stay with him. This is how it is with Amma. All
are my children, and I cannot leave them to take some vacation.”
Having understood his own self to be the essence of all
peace, the jñànì is eternally at rest. Thus he harbors no motive
to perform any action to attain peace, comfort or any other form
of happiness.
155
One Who Neither Rejoices,
Hates, Grieves Nor Desires
YAÃ NA HÄÇYATI NA DVEÇÂI
NA ÉOCATI NA KÀÊKÇATI
Next, Sri Krishna elaborates on a quality he has already mentioned
in the first verse of the Amritashtakam with sama-duãkha-sukhaã—
one who has mental equipoise in both hardship and favorable
circumstances. Since we have seen this before, we can simply
note, as Sri Sankara points out, that when Krishna says na ãäçyati,
it means the atma-jnani does not rejoice upon attaining an
object most people enjoy, and na dveçâi means he does not feel
aversion about receiving an object most people detest. Similarly,
na éocati means he does not grieve upon losing a favored object.
Na kàêkçati means, “He does not desire anything unattained.”
The atma-jnani knows the peace that is his true nature
can never be affected by the material objects of the world. At
most he see his body’s interaction with the various objects as
a play to which he is a spectator. Even more wondrous is his
understanding that “This play—with all of its colors, shapes,
variations, comedic aspects, tragic aspects, adventure and
uneventful moments—has only one thing as its foundation, and
that is me—pure consciousness. Even the duration of the play—the
principle of time itself—is but an illusion to which I am serving
as the substratum.” For one with such a view of himself and the
cosmos, where is the scope for elation, hatred or grief? What is
there even to desire?
156
One Who Has Renounced the
Auspicious & The Inauspicious
ÉUBHÀÉUBHA PARITYÀGÌ
With the quality before last, Sri Krishna said the parabhakta was a
sarvàrambha parityàgì, which Sri Sankara explained as meaning
he has ceased performing rituals and actions aimed at attaining
happiness through objects. Now Krishna takes things a step further
saying that the jñànì will be a éubhàéubha parityàgì—one who
has renounced not only selfish actions, but action altogether, be
it auspicious or inauspicious.
The idea that spiritual life culminates in the cessation of all
actions is difficult to grasp. As such, many people misunderstand
such statements. Then, in their confusion, they either write them
off as impractical or escapist, or they embrace their mistaken
understanding of them and become good-for-nothing. Krishna
himself warns that many spiritual seekers are confused on this
issue. He tells Arjuna: kië karma kim-akarmeti kavayo’pyatra
mohitàã—“Even scholars are deluded with regard to what is action
and what is inaction.” 1
Fortunately for us, Krishna himself clarifies. He says that
when an atma-jnani “renounces karma,” it does not mean that
his body and mind cease to perform actions—i.e. he ceases to
move, to speak and to think. On the contrary, the atma-jnani’s
body may move, speak and think much more than that of
the average person. To confirm this, one only has to take the
three primary examples cited in this book: Sri Krishna, Sri Adi
Sankaracharya and Amma. Sri Krishna actively played the roles
of son, cowherd, disciple, king, husband, servant, guru and
1 Gita, 4.16
157
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
friend—all of which involved copious interaction and action. He
battled Kaësa, Kàliya and Narakàsura, lifted Govardhana Hill,
served as charioteer to Arjuna in the Mahàbhàrata War and, of
course, taught Arjuna the wisdom recorded as the Bhagavad-Gita.
Likewise, Sri Sankara, even though he was a sannyàsì, authored
elaborate commentaries on the core scriptures, wrote original
Vedantic treatises like Upadeéasàhasrì and composed hymns
such as Saundarya Lahirì. Moreover, he travelled the length and
breadth of India by foot, held debates with proponents of other
schools of thought, and started several Asrams. More to the point,
according to his biographies, he did all of this in just a short 32
years. Similarly, Amma is always engaged in action—giving darsan,
listening to humanity’s problems on her tours of India and the
West, giving advice to those who ask, etc. She practically never
rests. Even if Amma has “a day off,” she spends it meeting with
the heads of her various humanitarian institutions and reading
the personal letters that contain the troubles and prayers of her
devotees. In fact, in terms of action, we cannot compare Amma
to any other mahatma. At best, we could compare her to Krishna,
but I am sure that Amma has engaged in more action than even
he did. Therefore, from the example of these three atma-jnanis
alone, we can see that “renouncing action” cannot mean at the
commonly understood level of the body-mind complex.
To truly understand what is meant when the scriptures
say, “renounce action,” we have to remember the nature of the
atma—the true “I.” As discussed, the atma is neither a performer
of actions, nor the reaper of their results [neither a kartà nor a
bhoktà]. At best, it is the consciousness that, ever detached, enlivens
the body and mind, and witnesses its performance of action
and its reaping of the fruits of those actions. Thus, ultimately,
“renouncing karma” means to renounce the misconception that
“I”—the atma—am the “doer” or “experiencer.” This means that
158
Amritashtakam
even when the jñànì’s body is walking, talking and thinking, he
knows that, in reality, he is not the one speaking, he is not the
one moving, he is not the one thinking. His view is: “It is the
body and mind that are performing these actions, and I am not
the body or mind.” Krishna states this very clearly in the Gita:
naiva kiëcit-karomìti yukto manyeta tattva-vit |
paéyañcchäåvan-späéañjighrannaénan-gacchan-svapañévasan ||
pralapan-visäjan-gähåannunmiçan-nimiçannapi |
indriyàåìndriyàrtheçu vartanta iti dhàrayan ||
The knower of truth should think with awareness, “I do
nothing at all”—though seeing, hearing, touching, smelling,
eating, going, sleeping, breathing, speaking, evacuating,
holding, opening and closing the eyes—firm in the thought
that this is but the senses moving among sense objects.1
This understanding is possible because through his knowledge
the atma-jnani has disidentified with his lower self, comprised of
the body, mind and senses, and identified with the higher self, the
pure, blissful consciousness, which he knows to be all-pervasive
and eternal. Just as the atma-jnani is able to witness the external
phenomena in the world around him without any need to claim
agency, so too he is able to witness his own body’s actions and
his own mind’s thoughts without claiming agency. By the power
of his understanding, he is able to transact while discriminating
the body and mind from himself, the consciousness that pervades
and sustains them.
Thus, while a Sri Krishna, a Sri Sankara or an Amma may
seem to perform copious action, in reality this is only from the
view of those who remain confused about the nature of the self.
From Amma’s perspective she is not the body that travels, gives
1 Gita, 5.8–9
159
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
talks, sings bhajans and gives darsan. She is the atma and has
never performed an action, never reaped the fruit of an action
and never will.
Aside from the testament of the lives of various mahatmas,
there are other reasons why “renouncing karma,” doesn’t mean
ceasing physical action. One of these, Amma has explained
many times. In order to demonstrate the difference between true
renunciation of action, as explained above, and false renunciation,
Amma often cites the example of someone who has recently
moved to an Asram. The person in Amma’s anecdote tells the
others in the Asram about all the things he has left behind in
order to take up Asram life: his book collection, his nice clothing,
his job, his car, his pets, etc. Ostensibly, this individual has
renounced certain actions. He has stopped the action of collecting
books, of wearing nice clothing, of driving a nice car, etc. To
the layperson this will sound like “renouncing action.” However,
Amma says that all of these “non-actions” are still fully loaded
with a sense of ahaêkàra [identity with the body-mind complex]
and its associate sense of agency. Thus, even though these “nonactions” seem to be cessation of action, in reality, they are no
different from engagement in action.
In fact, there is no such thing as “nonperformance of action”
at the level of the body and mind. The body and mind will
always act. Even if an individual sits quiet, this is but another
form of action, as it involves the individual’s will, etc. Real
non-performance of action can only happen through a proper
understanding of our true nature. We have to understand that
we are not the body or the mind but the atma, and it is only the
body-mind that is performing actions and reaping their fruits,
never the atma.
This is an extremely subtle truth. This is why Krishna repeats
it over and over again throughout the Gita. In fact, it is repeated
160
Amritashtakam
so often that, Sri Sankara feels it necessary to explain the need
for the repetition. His answer is insightful. First he says it is
repeated because the principle of non-agency is so subtle that it is
difficult to comprehend. Then he adds another reason: Since the
universe and the mechanics of human perception are constantly
presenting humanity with a contrary-to-reality experience, it is
very easy for the Vedantic seeker to forget this truth. As such,
he falls back into his attachment to the illusion that he is the
body-mind complex and thus is the performer of actions and
the enjoyer of their fruits.1
The question, of course, comes: What is the nature of this
delusion? Why, if I am not the performer of actions, does it seem
like I am? This is explained through the example of someone
travelling in a vehicle like a boat. In fact, the man standing on
the boat is the one who is moving. However, when he looks at
the riverbank, he may have the experience that he is standing
still and the scenery around him is what is moving. He thus
superimposes his movement upon his inert surroundings.
Vedànta says that a similar illusion is taking place with regard to
humankind and its sense of agency. The only difference is that
instead of superimposing the action of a sentient entity (the man
in the boat) upon an insentient one (the trees on the riverbank),
we are superimposing the actions of our inert body and mind
upon the only true sentient entity in all of existence—ourselves,
the all-pervasive atma. In the same way the perception that the
riverbank is moving is natural, so too is this illusion. Thus, the
only way to disempower this illusion is to dwell continually in the
reality of the Vedantic teaching. Moreover, whenever the tendency
arises to identify with the doer or to fret over the results that will
come to us in the future, we have to recollect this teaching and
remind ourselves, “This is all an illusion. I am superimposing
1 Commentary on Gita, 4.18
161
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
the actions of my body and mind upon myself. In reality, I am
not the performer of actions; I am the eternal witness. The fruits
of actions should not make me tense because they relate only
to the body and mind, and I am but pure awareness, and thus
unaffected,” etc.
Throughout the Gita, Sri Krishna constantly advises Arjuna
not to refrain from action physically. He tells Arjuna, again
and again, that he should perform his work with a karma-yoga
attitude. Moreover, if and when Arjuna becomes ready to adopt a
Vedantic outlook, he should continue to perform his duties with
that enlightened Vedantic perspective. He doesn’t give Arjuna an
option of stopping actions. The question thus arises, why is this
an issue? Is there some scope for renouncing actions physically?
Traditionally when someone takes sannyàsa, he does
renounce karma physically. However, this does not mean that
he ceases all physical actions, but that he stops performing Vedic
rites. In Krishna’s day, Indian society was still adhering to the
Vedic way of life. Thus, many people were regularly performing
compulsory and noncompulsory rituals. Moreover, many people
were doing these rites to secure their own comfort and material
prosperity, either in the here or in the hereafter. Thus, when one
took sannyàsa, he was supposed to cease all rites—compulsory
and noncompulsory. In fact, in this day and age, the topic of
ceasing Vedic rites has become rather academic since hardly any
one is performing Vedic rites in the first place. Therefore the most
important things to understand about “renouncing karma” are:
1) maintaining awareness of the truth that the true self can never
perform any action, and 2) the cessation of all actions—religious
or mundane—aimed at attaining the experience of happiess and
security through material ends.
Another reason the sannyàsì is to stop all Vedic rites is
that, traditionally, he is supposed to dedicate himself to only
162
Amritashtakam
three actions: éravaåam, mananam and nididhyàsanam—studying
Vedànta under his guru, clarifying his doubts and, once he
has clearly understood, remaining steadfast in the Vedantic
mindset. In order to make maximum time for those activities,
his other actions are to be limited to the bare minimum required
for sustaining the body. It is Amma’s firm stance that in the
present-day world a sannyàsì’s life should be for service. That
service can be in teaching the scriptures (which, for the teacher,
is another form of nididhyàsanam since he is forced to dwell in
the teaching just as much as, if not more than, his students)
or it can be through other avenues. Amma believes a sannyàsì
should stand firm in the awareness that he is not the body or
mind and, in turn, offer those instruments completely for the
upliftment of the world.
Obviously the majority of people—even the majority of
spiritually inclined individuals, Amma’s devotees included—are
not going to take sannyàsa. It is a path for a very small section
of society. As discussed in the chapter on nirmamaã, external
sannyàsa—shaving one’s head and donning ochre robes, etc—is not
required for liberation. What is required for liberation is inner
sannyàsa, maintaining a Vedantic outlook and being emotionally
at peace with the truth that all your forms of external security,
all your relationships, all your comforts and possessions can
disappear in the blink of an eye.
I remember, during Amma’s 2008 North American Tour,
Amma was sitting with a family of devotees. The eldest son, who
had recently graduated from college, was sitting a bit back from
the rest of the family. Eventually Amma called him forward and
into her arms. He timidly asked Amma, “Do you have any advice
for me? Any suggestions?” Amma smiled at him graciously. He
then said, “Anything Amma says I will do.” At this point, the
father jokingly chided, “Even become a sannyàsì?” A serious
163
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
expression came over Amma’s face and she said in English, “No,
no, no. Not for you. Family life is very nice. You be a sannyàsì
in your heart. Not outside with the robes, but in your heart.”
This is the same advice Krishna gives Arjuna in the Gita, and the
advice that Amma has for the majority of humanity.
Some people may ask, “Isn’t renouncing karma possible
through karma yoga?” After all, in karma yoga, one does not look
for any puåyam [karmic merit]; one performs work and seva only
“to please God.” Of course, the karma yogì knows that through
this worship he will attain mental purity, but that is not his
conscious focus. He simply works as worship, accepting whatever
comes to him in life with equanimity as God’s prasàdam. Some
people refer to this as “renouncing karma.” However, the karma
yogì has only renounced attachment to the material fruits of his
actions, not his sense of agency or his identification with the
body that experiences those actions’ fruits. Such renunciation
is only possible through Vedantic understanding. However, the
karma-yoga attitude is a crucial rung on the spiritual ladder.
Without it, we can never ascend to Vedànta.
If we reflect, we can see that, with regard to action, there are
three levels of mindsets presented in Sanàtana Dharma: 1) I am
the agent of action and the reaper of results, 2) I am doing this
action as worship of the Lord alone and not out of any attempt
for material benefit other than purity of mind, and I will accept
whatever comes materially as the God’s prasàdam, and 3) I am
not the performer of any action whatsoever, nor the reaper of
any fruit; I am merely a witness of the actions of the body-mind
complex. Moving to the second mindset is the beginning of
spiritual life, and establishment in the third is the culmination of
spiritual life. However, before one can move from mindset two to
mindset three, one must not only have significantly purified his
mind of likes and dislikes, he also must be completely clear on
164
Amritashtakam
the Vedantic teaching regarding the nature of the self. Therefore,
until one has fully understood Vedànta, he really cannot enter
the final mindset. He should continue to employ the karmayoga attitude toward all of his actions until he has fully grasped
Vedànta. For, if we have yet to clearly understand why we are not
the agent, how can we possibly live maintaining such an attitude?
Thus we can never discount karma yoga’s essential role in
the spiritual path. Moreover, we should hold on to the karmayoga attitude until we have the strength and maturity to securely
take hold of the Vedantic attitude. Spiritual life is like climbing a
mountain using a rope. At a certain point, we may see another
rope that, ultimately, can take us higher. We can switch ropes,
but first we should be confident that we have the strength to
make that transition. Don’t let go of the old rope until you are
sure you have the second one firmly in your grasp. Without
letting go of the old rope, test your grip on the new rope. That
is, when difficult circumstances arise in life—ridicule, illness,
defeat, censure—can we accept them remaining detached, seeing
ourselves as not the one being mocked, sick, defeated, criticized?
Can we get through such times without complaint, maintaining
the same witness-like attitude we have towards the tragedies in
the lives of strangers? If we feel we are ready to try to hold on
to that attitude, then we are ready for the new Vedantic rope.
If not, we need to hold onto the karma-yoga rope for a bit
longer. And it is not that the karma-yoga rope itself is so easy to
hold on to! Even there, we should be able to accept those same
difficulties—ridicule, illness, loss, etc—peacefully as God’s will.
That in itself is a great accomplishment. If we are honest, the
majority of us will admit that even such an attitude is difficult
for us. In fact, anytime we find ourselves praying, “Oh, Amma,
please remove this problem from me; I cannot bear it,” it is an
indicator that we are having difficulty even hanging on to the
165
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
karma-yoga rope. Thus, it is essential that we are honest with
ourselves, understand our level and proceed from there.
Before proceeding to the next quality, we should understand
the benefit of renouncing agency. While on the one hand
non-agency is the truth regarding our real nature, maintaining
awareness of that truth brings us an important byproduct and
that is freedom from another false self-notion—the sense of being
the experiencer. This pair—the false notion of the sense of agency
and the false notion of the sense of being the experiencer—is
inextricably linked. In order to understand this connection, we
need to do some further investigation of the scriptural concepts
of karma and karma phalam—action and its fruit.
Each action we perform has two effects: a perceived result
and an unperceived result.1
 The perceived result is the direct
physical ramifications that take place according to the laws
of science and psychology. The unperceived result is what is
popularly referred to as karma.2
 This result is derived not from
the action but from the motivation behind the action. Unlike
the perceived result, the unperceived result must ripen before
it manifests. The duration is inscrutable; it could be a week, a
year, a lifetime, 10 lifetimes... Regardless, all intentional human
actions performed with a sense of agency eventually bear a
motivation-based fruit. Selfless actions done to help others, for
example, eventually produce an auspicious result. Selfish actions
that harm others eventually will produce an inauspicious result.
According to the scriptures, every experience that comes to us in
life originates in the agent-identified motivations with which we’ve
performed past actions. If we ask, “If all births and experiences
1 Däçâa phalam and adäçâa phalam, respectively
2 Karma literally means “action.” This is the word’s primary meaning. However,
in English, its secondary meaning of karma phalam—“the fruit of action”—has
become its most common usage.
166
Amritashtakam
are dictated by actions performed in the past, what about our
first life?” the answer is, “There was no first life; our previous
births are beginningless.”
During the course of our infinite past lives, each individual
has accumulated an infinite amount of karmic fruits. The
scriptures divide this karma into three categories: sañcitam, àgàmì
and pràrabdham.
1 Sañcitam refers to the infinite pool of yet-tofructify karmic fruit amassed from the actions an individual has
performed during his infinite past lives. Pràrabdham is the karmic
fruit separated from that reservoir to fructify and be reaped in the
current lifetime. Àgàmì is the karmic fruit created by the actions
we are performing in this current life. Some àgàmi karma will
bear fruit in this life itself, some in future births.
The process of karma-induced birth and death is an infinite
vicious circle. This is why the scriptures refer to it as the saësàra
cakram—the wheel of transmigration. As such, it may seem that,
just as there is no first birth, there is also no last birth either.
However, this is not the case. For, as is commonly known, self-knowledge frees one from the karmic cycle. How so?
In this context, it is common to hear people speak of
“exhausting karma.” Many people believe that one can only
attain liberation when they have exhausted—or “burned up”—all
of their past karma. While it is true that every experience—be it
auspicious or inauspicious—exhausts/burns some of our karma,
we have to remember that our sañcita-karma reservoir is infinite.
Moreover, the motivations behind our current actions are only
creating more àgàmi karma, much of which upon our death will
be added to that stockpile. Thus we can see that there is no escape
from the totality of the fruits of our actions via their experience.
1 The literal meanings of sañcitam, àgàmì and pràrabdham respectively are:
“that which is accumulated,” “that which is impending” and “that which has
commenced.”
167
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
In the Gita, Krishna provides us with the only solution, and
that is self-knowledge:
yathaidhàësi samiddho’gnirbhasmasàt-kurute’rjuna |
jñànàgniã sarva-karmàåi bhasmasàt-kurute tathà ||
Just as a well-kindled fire turns all logs into ash, O Arjuna, so
too the fire that is self-knowledge turns all karmas into ash.1
According to the scriptures, atma-jnanam has several effects
with regard to the fruits of karma. First, because of the jñànì’s
disidentification with the agent, his actions immediately cease to
produce àgàmi karma. This is because the jñànì identifies only with
the witness consciousness, not the agent. It is the identification
as the agent—the sense “I am the doer”—that produces karmic
fruits. Without it, all actions are mere movement from a karmic
perspective. Thus, it is the jñànì’s knowledge and awareness of
the truth “I am not the agent” that destroys his karma’s ability
to bear motivation-based fruit. (Here, we should not forget that
the jñànì’s disidentification with agency never results in immoral
behavior, since such behavior has been eradicated by virtue of
his years of self-discipline and by his self-knowledge.)
One reason Krishna uses the example of the burnt log is that a
burnt log looks more or less the same as a normal log. However,
just touch it with the poker and it will crumble to ash. In the
same way, the actions of the jñànì will look just like anyone else’s
actions. However, they are utterly different due the jñànì’s lack
of sense of agency, and, as such, they do not produce karmic
fruit for him either.
How is this possible? In order to understand, it is helpful
for us to look at perhaps the most oft-chanted verse in the entire
Bhagavad-Gita. This verse is presented by Krishna specifically in
1 Gita, 4.37
168
Amritashtakam
response to Arjuna’s desire to better understand why the atma-jnani’s actions are “seedless.”1
 The verse in question is from the
fourth chapter:
brahmàrpaåaë brahma havirbrahmàgnau brahmaåà hutam |
brahmaiva tena gantavyaë brahma-karma-samàdhinà ||
The oblational ladle is brahman. The oblation is brahman.
The action of pouring the oblation is done by brahman into
the fire that is brahman. Brahman alone is the attainment
of one who abides in the understanding that [all aspects]
of karma are brahman.
2
This verse describes the understanding of the jñànì when he
performs any action. While Krishna uses an example of a Vedic
rite, the import can be extended to any action, be it religious
or mundane. An action involves six factors: 1) the agent of the
action, 2) the direct object of the action, 3) the action itself, 4) the
instrument with which the action is performed, 5) the physical
location in which the action occurs, and 6) the result of the action.
Here, Krishna says that the jñànì abides in the understanding
that all six of these have as their substratum the one and the
same brahman—his own atma—and thus, ultimately, it can only
be brahman that is temporarily appearing as all diverse names
and forms. In this metaphor, the performer of the Vedic rite
represents all agents of action. The oblation represents all direct
objects of action. The action of pouring the oblation represents
all actions themselves. The ladle represents all instruments
involved in carrying out any action. The oblational fire represents
1 In his introductory commentary on 4.24, Sri Sankara introduces the transitional
question, kasmàt punaã kàraåàt kriyamàåaë karma svakàryàrambham akurvat
samagram pravilìyate iti ucyate: “For what reason, again, does an undertaken
action [by the atma-jnani] get totally destroyed without producing its result?”
2 Gita, 4.24
169
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
all physical locations in which all actions take place. The karma
reaped through the rite represents the results of actions—karma
phalam. Krishna then calls the person who performs actions with
such an understanding a brahma karma samàdhi—one who
remains established in the ability to see brahman in all the six
aspects of action.
How does this verse answer Arjuna’s question regarding why
the atma-jnani’s actions produce no karmic results? Sri Sankara
explains from two perspectives. First, he says that since someone
with such a vision sees himself as brahman and not as the agent
of action, by the very nature of that understanding his actions
become seedless. However, secondly, even if this were not the
case and the jñànì’s actions did bring fruit, the jñànì would not
see that fruit as having any reality. For, when one sublimates
all the six aspects of action as ultimately unreal superficial
projections, the karmic fruits are included in that sublimation.
Thus, all experiences that come to the jñànì are not seen as fruits
of actions, but as brahman cloaked in an illusory form. The
spiritually ignorant may say, “The fruit is coming to the jñànì.”
At most, the jñànì would say, “Brahman is coming to brahman.”
Here, one may get a doubt: If one does not desire any fruit,
what would spur him to any action? As mentioned before, the
jñànì does retain one desire, and that desire is his sole motivation:
loka-saêgraha—the upliftment of the world. Even though he knows
that duality is but an illusion, nonetheless, out of compassion
for those who have yet to reach his level of understanding, he
continues to adhere to dharma as an example for humankind.
And even if the jñànì becomes a reclusive sannyàsì and ceases
to interact in society, the scriptures give him the imperative of
continuing to perform the basic actions for human survival.
Thus far we have seen only why atma-jnanam ceases the
production of àgàmi karma. However, the scriptures say that it
170
Amritashtakam
destroys the jñànì’s sañcita-karma reservoir as well. This is because
upon the jñànì’s death, atma-jnanam severs the umbilical cord,
as it were, that connected him to that reservoir. As Amma often
says, “If you owe someone money in a dream, when you wake
up you don’t still have to pay it, do you?”
This leaves us with only one more type of karma: pràrabdha
karma—the subset of karmic fruits destined to ripen and bear fruit
in this lifetime itself. The scriptures say that pràrabdham is like
an already fired arrow. Thus, there is no avoiding its experience.
Regardless, although he may experience physical pain or comfort
according to his pràrabdham, the jñànì is detached from those
experiences. He sees them as happening to the body and mind,
not to himself, the atma. Thus physical pain does not sway him
emotionally. Actually, the idea that pràrabdham must be endured
is only from the perspective of the spiritually ignorant, never from
that of the jñànì himself. From his perspective, self-knowledge
also destroys pràrabdham because he no longer sees it as having
any reality. The jñànì in Krishna’s example sees all six aspects of
the Vedic rite as being essentially brahman, and pràrabdham is
one of those aspects.
Moreover, due to the jñànì’s self-conception as pure
consciousness, he does not view himself as the experiencer in any
way, shape or form. He has rejected both poles of experience—the
auspicious and the inauspicious as well as everything in between—
as phenomena merely happening to the body and mind. His
attitude is “I am neither of these; I am merely a witness.” Thus,
when the jñànì’s body, say, falls ill, society may say, “Oh, he is
undergoing his pràrabdham,” but from the jñànì’s perspective,
he is undergoing absolutely nothing at all. He does not connect
himself with agency or with any experience. He is, was and
will always be the atma, which neither acts nor experiences. At
most, he is just a witness, and that too a witness to a play in
171
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
which all the actors, sets, props—even the Director Himself—are
but temporary names and forms projected upon the eternal
substratum that is he himself.
This leads us to another important point: Although the
scriptures do speak of such concepts as attaining jìvanmukti
and videhamukti—liberation while living and liberation from
embodiment after death—these are exclusively from the standpoint
of those who have yet to attain self-knowledge. They are events
set in time. Jìvanmukti is the event in time wherein the individual
finally becomes established in identification with the atma.
Videhamukti is the event in time wherein the body of one whose
has become established in identification with the atma perishes.
Thus both of these “liberations” are related to the body and mind,
but not to the atma. The jñànì knows he is ever liberated, ever
bodiless, ever mindless. Therefore, one who identifies with the
atma will see neither of these “liberations” as relating to him.
When time itself is an adjunct—a mere bubble, superimposed
upon the self—what then to say of events taking place in time?
They are but bubbles within bubbles, plays within a play, dreams
within a dream.
This discussion emphasizes the wide array of potential selfconceptions and of undestandings regarding action and the fruits
of action. One of the splendors of the atma-jnani is his ability to
understand a person’s level and to address him from that level.
Along these lines Amma sometimes relates a personal anecdote. It
seems at one point a man came for darsan and informed Amma
that he was possessed by a demon. He then asked Amma if she
could see the demon where it resided, looming over his shoulder.
Amma very sweetly told him that there was no demon and that
perhaps he was suffering from a psychological problem and
should see a doctor. As soon as she said this, the man started
shouting at Amma. Amma immediately changed her stance and
172
Amritashtakam
said, “Oh, wait! Now I see him. For some reason, I couldn’t see
him before, but now I can.” Pacifying and consoling the man
thus, Amma said, even though there was indeed a demon, she
would always be with him and protect him from it; he should
not worry. Then the man became very happy. He said, “Before
you, no one has ever understood me.” Amma says, in this way,
by her coming down to his level, the man was able to attain at
least a relative amount of peace.
Amma typically employs this story to humorously
demonstrate how we often have to come down to the level of
other people in order to help them ascend—typically, a child or
a spouse. However, from the supreme perspective of an atma-jnani like Amma, every single person who comes to her with any
problem whatsoever is delusional. This delusion is not limited
to those who come to her with personal, social and financial
problems, but also those of us who come with so-called “spiritual
problems”—our inability to get concentration in meditation, our
frustration at our lack of peace of mind, our inability to transcend
our likes and dislikes, etc.
How can that be? Because all problems are from the level of
either the body or the mind. Just as the atma-jnani knows that
he is not the body or mind, he knows with equal conviction
that the same reality holds true for every being in creation. Just
because someone believes himself to be the body-mind complex
doesn’t make it so. Therefore, when we approach Amma with our
problems, she could say, “Actually, I don’t know what you mean.”
As Amma sometimes explains, when someone complains to a
jñànì about problems, it is like someone complaining to the sun
about darkness. The sun doesn’t even know what darkness is.
However, what would happen if Amma actually were to
take this stance? What if when someone comes to her and says,
“Amma, I’m going through a bad astrological period; nothing
173
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
is working out,” she were to respond, “Astrological period? You
were never born and will never die”? What if when someone says,
“My family life is a mess; everyone is always fighting,” she were
to respond, “Your family members are but shifting names and
forms upon the pure existence that is your self. Being one with
everything, how can you have a relationship with anything in
this universe, much less a family?” What if when someone tells
her, he isn’t getting peace of mind despite his spiritual practices,
she were to say, “Who cares about peace of mind? You’re not the
mind. Why are you concerned about that piece of inert matter?
Your connection with it is an illusion”?
From Amma’s supreme perspective, all of those answers are
in fact the reality. However, as honest and true as they are, if
Amma were to speak to us like this, we would behave just like
the man who believed he was possessed when Amma told him
there was no demon. We would say, “Amma, how can you say
my problems are unreal? You don’t know what it’s like to suffer
like this!” Amma understands this. Therefore, just like she did
with the insane man, she comes down to our level. She may give
someone suffering from a bad astrological period a means to
mitigate it. She will give us advice on how to deal with our family
members and to establish more harmony in the home. Moreover,
she will certainly help us adjust our spiritual practices and give
us the encouragement and inspiration we need to persevere.
Occasionally, if Amma feels the individual is mature enough,
she may give a Vedantic response. However, the very fact that
we are presenting Amma with such problems, to some extent,
demonstrates that we are not ready for a Vedantic response.
Coming down to our level is an expression of Amma’s
compassion. In fact, when discussing the guru, all scriptures
praise his compassion. To be a guru, one must be compassionate
because if a mahatma were to choose to do so, he could easily
174
Amritashtakam
write off as an illusion this world and all of its problems, including
those of everyone who approaches him. It is only because of the
guru’s willingness to come down to our level that we are gradually
able to rise up to his. This in reality describes Amma’s entire
life—all of her interactions. In fact, the only time Amma rejects
the problems associated with duality is when those problems
come to her herself. If Amma suffers physical pain, she sees it
as màyà—an illusion. If someone acts maliciously toward her,
again, it is màyà. She could take everything in this world the
same way, but she does not because she knows that it is only
by coming down to our level that she can lift us up. However,
coming down to our level, she never loses sight of the ultimate
reality. In Amma’s own words, “In spite of whatever is happening,
I am always at peace.” That is the uniqueness and glory of the
atma-jnani.
175
One Who Views Friend &
Foe, Honor & Dishonor,
Heat & Cold, and the
Comfortable & Uncomfortable
With Equanimity
SAMAÃ ÉATRAU CA MITRE CA
TATHÀ MÀNÀPAMÀNAYOÃ
ÉÌTOÇÅA-SUKHA-DUÃKHEÇU SAMAÃ
Sri Krishna wants to reiterate that one of the main results of truly
understanding our fundamental nature and maintaining an
awareness of that understanding is that we will cease to be affected
by the vicissitudes of life. The atma-jnani’s knowledge gives him
the capacity to give every experience its proper import. From that
enlightened perspective, a black-and-white labeling takes place:
self or non-self—atma or anatma. Only one thing gets the atma
stamp: pure awareness-existence-bliss. All his perceptions—all the
myriad people, places, things and interactions he perceives—are
without exception, given the same status: mithyà—illusion. In this
regard, his assessment is ruthless: “If I experience it, it is unreal.”1
When a person has become rooted in such an outlook, how
can he be swayed by the ups and downs of life? He has become
like the philosopher-mathematician who says 1=10 because
both are numbers. When you have adopted such a perspective,
Krishna says, your inner tranquility remains samaã [the same,
1 Unreal in the sense that it is a transient reality that cannot exist independently.
176
Amritashtakam
equanimous] in all circumstances: in the presence of an enemy1
 or
a friend, honor or dishonor, cold or heat, comfort or discomfort.
Knowing everything to be but a passing phenomenon unable to
touch your true nature, you easily accept the so-called “good” and
the so-called “bad” with equanimity. Just as 1=10 because both
are numbers, so too good=bad because both are mere experiences.
The coldblooded codification of the universe into two
groups—with “I,” the eternal witness consciousness, on one side,
and all experiences on the other—is the foundational division
of the jñànì’s perception. In someone like Amma who has fully
assimilated this truth, this classification does not require any
effort; it is the foundation of her perception. Just as when we walk
down the street we do not have to put in effort to differentiate
between the world and our own physical body, so too Amma’s
ability to discriminate the atma from the anatma is natural and
spontaneous.
Here there is room for confusion because when we begin
labeling things as atma and anatma—self and non-self—we seem to
be speaking of the universe in dualistic terms. What happened to
Advaita—non-duality? Let it be clear when we say anatma, we are
not speaking about something separate from atma. This is why,
at this stage of understanding, we typically abandon the àtmaanatma terminology and begin speaking in terms of brahman
and mithyà. Brahman is a synonym for atma. It is the eternal,
blissful consciousness that is our true nature. Mithyà literally
means “illusion,” but it is not an illusion in terms of something
that does not exist altogether, but rather an illusion in terms of
something that is only temporary perceived. Furthermore, like
1 As mentioned in the first verse of Amritashtakam, the atma-jñànì has no
enemies and treats everyone compassionately as a friend. (Gita, 12.13: adveçâà
sarva-bhùtànàm maitraã karuåa eva ca.) Regardless, others, out of jealousy, fear
or misunderstanding may perceive the jñànì to be a foe.
177
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
all illusions, it has a real substratum. The snake seen in a rope
is a momentarily perceived phenomenon superimposed upon
the real substratum of the rope. You can neither say it exists nor
can you completely say that it does not exist. While the snake is
not real from the ultimate perspective, its essence—the rope—is
real. The snake is thus unreal in that it lacks an independent
existence. Its scales, its eyes, the way it coils—they all arise from
the substratum of the rope. If there were no rope, there would be
no snake. Àtma-jñànam is really the ability to see this truth—that
the world, despite seeming to exist independetly from the self, is
but a temporary “illusion” projected upon the substratum that is
the self. Name and form are ephemeral, but their existence and
our consciousness of them are very much real. Even the happiness
we experience in relation to them is ultimately a reflection of
our true nature.
This is why this black-and-white rendering of the universe
into atma and anatma or brahman and mithyà does not render
an individual coldhearted. It does not do so because although the
jñànì knows that all names and forms are temporary illusions and
are thus ultimately unreal, he also appreciates the self inherent
in the their appearance. He sees how just below the changing
surface of name and form lies an unchanging substratum—the
pure existence that is he himself.
Initially this type of analysis can seem to be a bit of
hairsplitting. After all, if the atom is the self, as it were, and
molecules are comprised solely of atoms, how could it be wrong
to see molecules as the self? It’s not wrong to view names and
forms as the self, but we should always remember that they are
only temporary forms. The reason that it is important to make
this distinction—the distinction between àtma and anatma,
brahman and mithyà, real and unreal, etc—is that when we regard
temporary phenomena to be as real as the permanent reality of
178
Amritashtakam
“I,” then we will cease to remain tranquil in the presence of the
pairs of opposites. If “the enemy and the friend,” “the praise and
the ridicule,” “the heat and cold,” “the comfort and discomfort,”
etc, are just as real as “I,” the pure awareness, then how can I
write them off as superfluous? If sickness, death, betrayal are of
an equal reality to consciousness-existence-bliss how can I avoid
suffering? Thus, it is an important distinction. We can see all
aspects of creation as “divine” and offer them our prostrations,
but we should never forget that it is their substratum, the pure
existence that is one with our own self, that has divinified them.
The name-and-form aspect of all creation can be said to be “real,”
but it is of a lower order of reality. We can even see death as
God, but in order to have total peace when death comes for us,
we need to remember death and dying are only of a temporary
reality, and “I,” the atma, am the only true and lasting reality.
Therefore, this understanding—that the world is divine, but
“I,” the one shared self, am of a higher reality of divinity—allows
the atma-jnani to enjoy life as a lìlà—a divine play. Lìlà is an oftheard and oft-used term, but to sincerely see something as a lìlà,
we must be able to remember that it is of a lower order of reality.
The play—despite all its murder, betrayal, heartbreak and danger—
is entertaining because I know it is ultimately unreal. If we forget
that truth, then it is no longer entertainment but a nightmare.
For the atma-jnani, life is exactly like a play. Friends and foes,
praise and ridicule, heat and cold, comfort and discomfort are
all are experienced by him, but they never disturb his mental
peace because he knows they are all the same—they are all but
different aspects of the movie of life. That said, seeing himself
as an actor in the play, he plays his role properly.
179
One Who Is Free
From Attachment
SAÊGA-VIVARJITAÃ
Sri Krishna has just said that the atma-jnani is able to remain
emotionally nonreactive when confronted with the poles of
human experience—being treated with friendship, being treated
with enmity, being praised, being ridiculed, etc. Now, he gives
a general reason for that equanimity: saêga-vivarjitaã—the jñànì
is free from attachment.
We have already seen the reason for the jñànì’s detachment,
both in our discussion of the previous quality and when
discussing the quality of anapekshaã [one who is free from desires].
Thus, by now, the relationship between self-ignorance, desire and
emotional reaction should be clear. Joy occurs when we attain
a desired experience, sorrow when we fail to. Desire for specific
experiences arises when we feel emotionally unfulfilled and deem
the experience to have the ability to complete us. This sense of
emotional unfulfillment takes place when we mistake ourselves
to be body-mind complex, which is inherently limited, finite,
mortal. Understanding his true nature to be not the body-mind
complex but the pure consciousness, the jñànì has corrected
the root error that triggers this chain reaction. In the infinite
imperturbable fullness that he claims as his very nature, there is
no scope for him to become emotionally bound to any specific
set of occurrences. Thus, he is ever detached, desireless, devoid
of expectations. His sense of fulfillment is firmly rooted in the
one true source of happiness—the self—and is in no way staked
to events, experiences, relationships or any other happening.
This is saêga-vivarjitaã.
180
One Who Remains the Same
in the Face of Censure & Praise
TULYA-NINDÀ-STUTIÃ
Sri Krishna adds another pair of opposite experiences to his list
of examples: nindà and stutiã—censure and praise. In both
circumstances, the jñànì is tulyaã—equanimous. Since the person
Krishna is speaking about is a mahatma, it is only natural that he
will often be praised, even physically worshipped. At a physical
level, he may be garlanded, become the object of pàdapùjà, be
prostrated before, etc. At a verbal level, bhajans may be written
about him, and there may be talks and books praising him.
Obviously we see this in Amma’s life. However, this physical
and verbal adoration never contribute to the jñànì’s sense of
completeness and fullness. Conversely, when the opposite comes,
he has always remains similarly unaffected.
181
One Who Is Silent
MAUNÌ
The next quality of the parabhakta mentioned by Sri Krishna is
maunì—one who is silent. Sri Sankara is quick to note this does
not mean that once a person attains self-knowledge he will stop
speaking. He says that it means he will have disciplined speech.1
That is, he will speak only when it is necessary for the benefit
of others.
Krishna knew that his council was necessary to give Arjuna
the resolve to fight the Mahàbhàrata War and, thereby, redirect
society to the path of dharma. Moreover, he knew that the world
would soon require a compendium of the Upanishadic knowledge
and that his conversation with Arjuna could become the basis
of that compendium. Therefore he spoke. Similarly, Sri Sankara
knew that people were losing sight of the true import of the
Vedas, and that confusion was obfuscating the path elucidated
by them. Therefore he spoke. The same is true for Amma. She is
speaking because countless people benefit from her willingness to
answer their doubts regarding spirituality, from her encouraging
words in times of hardship, from the guidance she provides to
the project managers of the Asram’s various charitable projects.
Spirituality reaches the next generation only through the words
of the guru. If atma-jnanis are unwilling to speak, there will be
no scope for the next generation to learn about spirituality or to
clear their doubts. Therefore, although some jñànìs do become
maunìs in the strictest sense of the term, it is certainly not a
one-to-one correspondence.
What is one-to-one with atma-jnanam is the cessation of
self-serving speech. If we introspect, we will see that the majority
1 saëyata-vàk
182
Amritashtakam
of our speech is part of our general attempt to gain contentment.
Discontentment is rooted in insecurity and desire. Therefore,
consciously or subconsciously, people are constantly trying various
means to remove that sense of insecurity and to fulfill their
desires. Sometimes we accomplish these ends through physical
action, but we also—especially in this day and age—do it through
speaking and other forms of communication, including social
media. We even speak to simply relieve the mental pressure
created by not speaking. Since the jñànì has found security and
joy in their one true source—the self—he is ever content, and his
speech ceases to continue as a method of generating contentment.
We should understand that for one like Amma whose
entire worldview is established in self-knowledge, judicious
speech or even total silence is not a product of a mental resolve
but is merely the natural effect of that wisdom. Regardless, for
those of us who still need to purify our minds, taking a vow
of silence one day a week, etc, can be helpful in our efforts to
develop mental discipline. Unnecessary speaking dissipates a lot
of energy that can be conserved and then used toward spiritual
ends. Furthermore, only when we reduce the quantity of our
speech can we hope to increase its quality, which is the more
important spiritual practice. This is something Krishna speaks
about in detail in the 17th chapter:
anudvegakaraë vàkyaë satyaë priya-hitaë ca yat |
svàdhyàyàbhyasanaë caiva vàêmayam tapa ucyate ||
The speech that causes no pain, that is truthful, pleasant
and beneficial, as well as the practice of self-study—these
are said to form verbal austerity.1
1 Gita, 17.15
183
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
Krishna is saying that if we are trying to practice control over our
speech, we should ensure that it fulfills the four following criteria:
anudvegakaram—it should not be hurtful to others; satyam—it
should be truthful; priyam—it should be sweet to the ear of those
listening; and hitam—it should be beneficial. As stated, such
refined speech will be natural for the jñànì. However, until we
assimilate self-knowledge and speech discipline becomes natural
for us, we should strive to maintain such standards in all of our
various forms of communication.
184
One Who Is Content
With Anything
SAËTUÇÂAÃ YENA KENACIT
The next quality is saëtuçâaã yena kenacit—being content with
anything. The atma-jnani’s contentment is rooted in his ability
to appreciate his own self as the source of all happiness. Thus
he remains at peace with whatever comes or doesn’t come to
him in life.
When discussing this quality, Sri Sankara stresses in
particular the lifestyle of the sannyàsì. He says, even in that
austere lifestyle, wherein one’s survival depends completely upon
the goodwill of others in terms of food, clothing and shelter, the
jñànì’s attitude is always “enough”—both in terms of receiving
and not receiving his basic needs. Thus, when someone gives a
tasty meal, his attitude is to be content with what is given and
not want more; and also when someone gives a bland meal or
even when his attempts at begging a meal end in failure, his
attitude is also “enough.” He never complains. 1
Although Amma never formally took sannyàsa, we see in
her its epitome. She abides in constant awareness of her true
nature, she accepts everything that comes to her, and all of her
1 According to sannyàsa dharma scriptures, there are different types of resolves
a sannyàsì can make with regard to mendicancy. Some, like Amma did, will
only take food when it is offered without asking. This is called ajagara vätti
because one eats like a python [ajagara]—only when food comes to it. Another
type of begging is called madhukàra vätti, wherein one seeks food, going from
house to house like a bee [madhukàra] going from flower to flower. Even here,
unlike the bee, a sannyàsì must make a resolve ahead of time as to how many
houses he will visit for this purpose. If the maximum number of houses is
reached and no food is offered, he must fast.
185
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
actions, words and resolves are not for personal gain but for
the upliftment of the world. Amma has never asked anyone
for anything—food, clothing, shelter. In terms of these basic
necessities, she has simply accepted what she has been given
and always with this “enough” attitude.
Before we disciples began living with Amma and ensuring
she was offered wholesome meals (which, regardless, Amma often
barely touches), she at times subsisted only on grass. She would
wear sàris that her sisters had discarded because they had tears
in them, stitching them up herself. If her family was disturbed
by her singing devotional songs in the house, she would happily
go outside and spend the night singing under the stars. Even the
rain did not bother her. Sometimes, when Amma was outside
she would sit in deep meditation, oblivious to the world around
her. At such times, a few devoted neighbors would sometimes
place food by her for her to eat when she came out of these
exalted states of mind. Often, by the time Amma would open
her eyes, the crows would have torn open the food packets and
scattered and eaten the food. Even then, Amma would accept.
She would never send word to the devotees to bring more food.
Her attitude is, was and always will be “enough.” That is true
contentment with regard to anything that is received. Such an
attitude comes naturally to the jñànì.
186
One Who Is Homeless
ANIKETAÃ
Sri Krishna continues to speak about the supreme devotee in terms
of sannyàsa, adding that he is aniketaã—one without a home.
As discussed previously, external renunciation of family and
home is not a required discipline for liberation. Many people
have attained self-knowledge without taking to monasticism.
What is an inescapable spiritual practice and what will be a
constant correlate with self-knowledge, however, is the attitude of
seeing both everywhere and nowhere as one’s home. As Amma
says, “Not everyone needs to become a sannyàsì, renouncing
everything. What needs to be renounced is the sense of ‘I’ and
‘mine.’”
Several years ago when Amma was having her annual
programs in Manhattan, a reporter came to interview her at
the devotee’s house where she and several other members of
the tour group were staying. That particular devotee lived in an
uptown penthouse, and the reporter commented on how posh
the accommodation was. I was a bit irritated because it seemed
like he was taking a soft shot at the fact that Amma was staying
in such a posh home. The fact of the matter is that Amma’s room
in Amritapuri is an extremely humble one-bedroom flat, and
on her foreign tours Amma primarily stays in small windowless
rooms in the program halls themselves. Even when she does
stay in a hotel, she stays in one small room. Moreover, I’ve been
present on many occasions when Amma has given up her own
accommodation for others and slept outside instead. When the
reporter asked this, Amma smiled and graciously told him that
she never looks at the grandeur or lack thereof of a devotee’s
house and that, from her perspective, no matter where she is
187
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
staying—be it Amritapuri or in a hotel room or at a devotee’s
house—she sees it like staying in a hotel. Amma said, “When you
stay in a hotel, you are happy when you come, happy when you
are staying there and happy when you leave. This is because you
come there with the intention of eventually leaving. You know
it’s only temporary and not your real home.”
Rooted in her Vedantic understanding, Amma’s sense of
non-ownership is so thorough that she can literally vacate and
walk away from anywhere without giving it a moment’s thought.
In fact, for many trying to exercise external renunciation, such
detachment remains elusive. I remember once an Asram resident
decided he wanted to move to one of Amma’s remote satellite
Asrams in order to live in a hut and exclusively practice meditation.
He took Amma’s blessings and relocated. About a month later,
the Amritapuri accommodation office sent him an email telling
him that the items he had left behind in his allocated room in
Amritapuri Asram would be packed up and stored elsewhere
so that someone else could live there. The person who sent the
email figured that he wouldn’t even hear back from the “hutdweller” for months since he was now living such an austere
“off-the-grid” lifestyle. To his surprise, he received a call from
the hut-dweller’s mobile phone just 30 minutes later. “You can’t
pack up my things! That’s my room!” This reveals how easy it is
to become attached to our possessions, even ones that we aren’t
even actively using.
The atma-jnani’s non-possessiveness comes from his
understanding of his true nature. Identifying with witness
consciousness, he cannot claim ownership even of his own body
and mind, much less a room or a house. As Amma beautifully
says, “Children, I have no particular place to dwell. I dwell in
your hearts.” While from the empirical standpoint of reality,
this statement has one particular truth to it, from the Vedantic
188
Amritashtakam
angle Amma is saying, “Children, I know my true nature to be
the self—the non-localized, unfragmented consciousness serving
as the foundation of all plurality. Being the very substratum of
time and space, how could I ever be limited to one location? I
pervade everywhere as existence, consciousness, bliss and can
be tangibly experienced as the eternal witness reflected in the
mind of each and every individual.”
Anyone can make such statements. However, if one really
has such self-understanding, it will be impossible to maintain a
sense of possessiveness with regard to anything. We will not only
“talk the talk,” we will “walk the walk.” Thus, internal sannyàsa
is a natural fruit of self-knowledge.
Although accepting that a householder can attain liberation,
Sri Sankara often stresses the importance of not only internal
but also external sannyàsa. This can be a bit disconcerting for
non-sannyàsìs. Therefore, I think it is worth delving into the
reasons for Sri Sankara’s stress on monasticism. First, we have
to remember that in Sri Sankara’s day, householder life was
synonymous with karma yoga and sannyàsa was synonymous
with Vedànta. Couple this with the fact that one of the main
emphases of Sri Sankara’s commentaries is that liberation only
comes from Vedantic knowledge, 1
 and it is easy to see why they
stress sannyàsa. For Sankara, the term sannyàsa was tantamount
to stressing Vedantic study and assimilation.
Secondly, in Sri Sankara’s time there was a school of
thought that was adamant that liberation did not come only from
knowledge but from a simultaneous combination of knowledge
1 Sri Sankara never discounts spiritual practices such as meditation on form
and karma yoga. He says such spiritual practices are meant to prepare the mind
for Vedantic study and assimilation. However, ultimately it is the understanding
“I am brahman and the world is mithyà” alone that actually liberates.
189
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
and Vedic karmas. 1
 It was Sri Sankara’s mission to eradicate this
misconception. Since Vedic karmas can only be performed by a
householder—never by sannyàsì—it was helpful for Sri Sankara’s
“thesis” to stress the attainment of liberation by sannyàsì. This
is because while a traditional householder can study Vedànta, he
must also perform Vedic karmas. When such a person attains
liberation, an external observer cannot say without a doubt
that it was his Vedantic knowledge that caused it. It could have
been his Vedantic knowledge. It also could have been his Vedic
karmas. And it also could have been a combination of the two.
Thus the householder makes for an inconclusive study example
because of lack of adequate controls. However, when a sannyàsì
who has renounced Vedic karmas attains liberation, there is no
doubt as to the cause since all the other potential factors have
been removed. In the sannyàsì, self-knowledge has been isolated
as the only possible cause. Whereas the householder was taking
two or three medicines when his disease was cured, the sannyàsì
was only taking one.
Regardless, as Amma always stresses, the most important
thing is not external renunciation, but inner renunciation. That
is, attaining self-knowledge and cultivating the inner sense of nonpossessiveness that is the byproduct of that knowledge—a sense of
non-possessiveness not only with regard to external possessions
and relationships but even with regard to our body and mind.
1 Jñàna-karma samuccaya vàda
190
One Who Is Firm in Knowledge
STHIRAMATIÃ
If we look at the Vedantic knowledge, or lack thereof, of a human
being, we can say that at any given time one will reside in one of
four stages of spiritual evolution. In the first stage, one identifies
with the body and mind and never seriously considers that his
self-concept is flawed and that he could be something other
than the amalgam of these two components. Stage two is when
one believes in the concept of “being the atma” or of “having a
soul,” but remains confused as to what that actually means. Stage
three is when one has a clear understanding of what is meant by
atma, why the atma is his true nature, and all the implications
of that truth with regard to the world he perceives around him.
Technically, at this stage, we can call the person an atma-jnani.
However, despite having learned Vedànta and the correct way of
viewing himself, God and the world, this person may still have
to struggle to maintain that perspective. He understands that
perspective and desires to maintain it, but due to habit he keeps
slipping back into his ignorant way of evaluating himself and the
world. Consequently he keeps reacting as per that ignorance. Only
when the maintenance of the Vedantic perspective has become
one’s natural, effortless, spontaneous way of viewing himself
and the world does one enter the final stage and become like
Amma. This final stage is given various names in various places
in the scriptures. Regardless, this is what Krishna is indicating by
sthiramatiã—one firm in knowledge.
Thus, this final quality stated by Sri Krishna is not so much
a quality per se, but rather a proclamation that to truly be
considered a parabhakta, it is not enough merely to have learned
the content of the scriptures; one must have assimilated that
191
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
knowledge to the full extent. That is, the Vedantic mindset must
have become the natural, continuous state of abidance. This
alone is supreme devotion.
Moreover, only when one has attained to this level, will
all the the qualities that have been mentioned by Krishna in
the Amritashtakam blossom to their full flower as one’s natural
characteristics. This is something stated in an important treatise
by one of Sri Sankara’s direct disciples:
utpannàtma-prabodhasya tvadveçâäätvàdayo guåàã
ayatnato bhavantyasya na tu sàdhana-rùpiåaã
Indeed, to the one in whom awareness of the self has arisen,
the qualities of “absence of hatefulness,” etc, surely come
without effort, not in the form of spiritual practices.1
If we review all the qualities mentioned by Krishna throughout the
Amritashtakam, we will see that they are almost all ramifications
of the assimilation of two core truths: “I am not the bodymind complex but the pure existence-consciousness-bliss” and
“Everything I perceive in the world around me is an expression of
my own true self but with various temporary names and forms.”
Assimilation of the first truth results in peaceful detachment
with regard to any possible problem relating to the body-mind
complex. The second results in compassionate assistance to all
beings. The more “firm in knowledge” we become with regard to
these truths, the more spontaneously and naturally the qualities
of the Amritashtakam will shine forth from within us. As Amma
says, “When there is true love, everything is effortless.”
1 Naiçkarmyasiddhiã of Sureévaràcàrya, 4.69
192
Concluding Verse
ye tu dharmyàmätam-idaë yathoktaë paryupàsate |
éraddadhànà mat-paramà bhaktàste’tìva me priyàã ||
However, those who follow this aforementioned
immortal dharma, endowed with faith, considering
me as the supreme goal—those devotees are extremely
dear to me.
With the previous quality, Sri Krishna concluded this list
of characteristics by saying the supreme devotee will be a
sthiramatiã—a person of firm knowledge. Thus, the list culminates
with no room for doubt: Only an atma-jnani whose worldview
has been permanently and firmly readjusted by his self-knowledge
can truly be considered a parabhakta.
The reason why the atma-jnani alone can be called a supreme
devotee was explained in the Introduction. First, having attained
permanent emotional fulfillment through his knowledge, he seeks
nothing from God, not even liberation. Secondly, since only a
person with self-knowledge views God and himself as one, only
such a person will be capable of loving God in the spontaneous
and unwavering manner that is the exclusive domain of “self love.”
These are the same reasons why Krishna says that God loves the
jñànì more than anyone else:
caturvidhà bhajante màë janàã sukätino’rjuna |
àrto jijñàsurarthàrthi jñànì ca bharataäçabha ||
teçàë jñànì nitya-yukta eka-bhaktirviéiçyate |
priyo hi jñànino’tyartham-aham sa ca mama priyaã ||
udàràã sarva evaite jñànì tvàtmaiva me matam |
àsthitaã sa hi yuktatma màm-evànuttamàë gatim ||
193
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
Four types of virtuous people worship me, O Arjuna:
the one in distress, the one seeking knowledge, the one
seeking wealth and the jñànì, O best of Bharatas. Of these,
the jñànì, ever-firm and of one devotion, excels. For I am
exceedingly dear to the jñànì, and he is dear to me. Noble
indeed are all of these, but the jñànì I deem to be my very
self. For, steadfast in mind, he is established in me alone,
as the supreme goal. 1
However, the atma-jnani who is “firm in wisdom” no longer
requires spiritual instruction. Nor does he need to study the
Gita. Nor does he need to hear that he is dear to God. For, he
is steeped in oneness with God. His love for God is his love
for his own self, and his love of his own self is God’s love for
him. Thus, he requires no such confirmation. On the contrary,
the one who needs to be reminded that he is “dear to God” is
the seeker. Thus, it is with the emotional needs of the seeker
in mind that Krishna concludes the Amritashtakam with this final
verse, wherein, in essence, he says, “Don’t worry if you’re not
firm in wisdom. Don’t worry if you aren’t even a jñànì in any
capacity of the term whatsoever. Even if you are just striving to
attain these characteristics, you are still very dear to me.”
Amma says the same thing. She understands our limitations,
accepts us and has the patience to lift us up. Thus, of course,
we are dear to her. Failing to see Amma as one with our own
self, we may not have supreme devotion to Amma, but Amma
definitely has supreme devotion to us.
Literally, what Krishna says is: tu—However; ye paryupàsate—
whoever follows; idaë yathoktaë dharmya amätam—this
aforementioned immortal dharma; éraddadhànàã—endowed with
faith; mat-paramàã—with me as their supreme goal; te bhaktàã—
those devotees; me atìva priyàã—are extremely dear to me.
1 Gita, 7.16–18
194
Amritashtakam
By saying, “however,” Krishna is indicating that, now, he
no longer speaking about the person of firm knowledge. He
is no longer speaking about someone for whom all these
spiritual qualities—non-hatred of all beings, a universal display
of friendship, compassion, etc—are not spiritual practices but
spontaneous expressions. That topic is over. With this concluding
verse of the Amritashtakam, Krishna is speaking about someone
who is still struggling to live up to those qualities. Thus, he
says, “Whoever just strives to follow these qualities, he is also
extremely dear to me.”
Krishna gives these qualities a specific name, and it is from
this name that these eight verses have come to be called the
Amritashtakam. That name is dharmyàmätam. Dharmya means that
which is in concordance with dharma; amätam means immortal.
These qualities are thus termed because they are in line with
dharma1
 and, furthermore, when the seeker strives to live by
them, they will lead him to atma-jnanam, upon attaining which
he “gains immortality”—i.e. he comes to understand that he is
the atma, that he was never born and can never die.
In fact more than anything else, Amma stresses the
importance of cultivating non-hatred, compassion, forgiveness
and other such universal values. She says that they are a priceless
treasure that we must ever put in effort to attain. Along these lines,
I recently read a newspaper article about a man who was eating
at a restaurant when he saw two street children peering at him
1 The fact that these qualities—be they undertaken as spiritual practices or
be they spontaneous expressions of self-knowledge—are in line with dharma is
stated because when taken from an orthodox view they can point to the taking
of sannyàsa and the subsequent cessation of performance of Vedic rites. Since
there are places in the Vedas wherein it is said Vedic rites should be performed
yàvajjìvam—“till death,” Krishna wants to make it clear that, if one takes sannyàsa,
his dharma is modified to encompass such renunciation. Thus, for him, cessation
of rites is dharmyam—in line with dharma.
195
A Vedantic Inquiry Into Supreme Devotion
through the window. Instead of ignoring them, he called them
inside and ordered them lunch, taking satisfaction in their smiles
and full stomachs. When he received the check, he found not a
bill but a note from the manager. It read, “Our cash register has
no charge for compassion.” While self-knowledge is the ultimate
goal of spiritual life, its foundation is compassion. As Amma
says, “Compassion is both the beginning and the culmination
of spiritual life.” This is the meaning of dharmyàmätam—the
immortal values that both lead to immortality and are an
expression of it as well.
However, it is not enough to just follow these qualities.
Within this final verse, Krishna embeds two more criteria. He says
such people should be éraddadhànàã—endowed with éraddhà—
and should mat-paramàã—see God as their ultimate goal in life.
Éraddhà means faith in the scriptures and words of the
guru.1
 The foundation of spiritual life is faith. Without it, we
can never move forward. This is not to say Vedànta is illogical.
It is logical, but its logic is applied to information that can only
be learned from the guru and scriptures. Just as pure logic is
applied to the data collected by our senses from the external
world, we apply the same logical rules to the data collected from
the guru and scriptures. Thus, faith is essential.
Mat-paràã means “those who see me as the supreme goal.”
No matter where we are in the spiritual path, until we firmly
abide in the awareness that liberation is our true nature, we
must always keep that as our primary goal. Even while practicing
karma yoga with the immediate goal of “pleasing God,” in our
back pocket should be the understanding that this is all in
service to our ultimate goal of abiding in our identity with God.
As Amma says, “No matter who we are or what we are doing,
1 Tattva Bodhaã, 1.3.5: guru vedànta-vàkyàdiçu viévàsaã éraddhà—“Faith in
the words of the guru and Vedantic scriptures is éraddhà.”
196
Amritashtakam
the duties we perform in the world should help us reach the
supreme dharma, which is oneness with the universal self. All
living beings are one because life is one, and life has only one
purpose. Owing to identification with the body and mind, one
may think, ‘To seek the self and attain self-realization is not my
dharma; my dharma is to work as a musician or an actor or a
businessman.’ It is okay if one feels this way. However, we will
never find fulfillment unless we direct our energy toward the
supreme goal of life.”
As long as our ultimate focus is not liberation, peace will
elude us because it is only when we align our lives with the
ultimate dharma that we can live in tune with a truly universal
harmony. When things are going our way, we may be satisfied
with lesser goals, but when adversity strikes, that satisfaction
will start crumbling.
Remaining intent on the goal is crucial in spiritual life. The
more focus we have, the faster our progress. It is our focus on the
goal that serves as the fuel for all of our other spiritual practices.
Amma is providing us with all the guidance and support we
could possibly need. Amma’s life and teachings, as well ancient
scriptures like the Bhagavad-Gita, are ever ready to remind us
that everything we are seeking is in fact our true self. To gain
inspiration, we need to remain focused and regularly spend time
with those sources of supreme knowledge. May Amma’s grace
bless our efforts to attain this infinite wisdom.
|| om lokàã samastàã sukhino bhavantu ||
May all the beings in all the worlds be happy.
197
Pronunciation Guide
The letters with dots under them (â, âh, á, áh, å, î) are palatal
consonants; they are pronounced with the tip of the tongue
against the hard palate. Letters without such dots are dental
consonants and are pronounced with the tongue against the base
of the teeth. In general consonants are pronounced with very
little aspiration unless immediately followed by an h (kh, gh, th,
dh, ph, bh, etc.), in which case aspiration is strong.
a like the a in America
à like the a in father (vowel is extended)
i like the ea in heat
ì like the ee in beet (long vowel)
u like the ui in suit
ù like the oo in pool (long vowel)
e like the a in gate (always long in Sanskrit)
o like the o in opinion (always long in Sanskrit)
ai like the ai in aisle
au like the ow in how
ä like the ri in river (usually not rolled)
kh like the kh in bunkhouse (hard aspiration)
gh like the gh in loghouse (hard aspiration)
ê like the n in sing
c like the c in cello
ch like the ch in charm (hard aspiration)
jh like the j in just (hard aspiration)
ñ like the ny in canyon
th like the t in table (hard aspiration, tongue at base of teeth)
dh like the dh in redhead (hard aspiration, tongue at base
of teeth)
ph like the ph in shepherd or like the f in fun
198
Amritashtakam
bh like the bh in clubhouse
v like the v in victory (but closer to a w)
éa like the ci in efficient
ça like the sh in shut
ã echoes preceding vowel